E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			761 Phil. 606
			




EN BANC


[ G.R. No. 182133, June 23, 2015 ]


UNITED OVERSEAS BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES, INC., PETITIONER, VS. THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS-HLURB, J.O.S. MANAGING BUILDERS, INC., AND EDUPLAN PHILS., INC., RESPONDENTS.
D E C I S I O N




PERALTA, J.:


Before this Court is a Petition for Review on 
Certiorari
 under Rule 45 of the Rules of Court, assailing the Decision
[1]
 and Resolution
[2]
 of the Court of Appeals (
CA
), dated February 27, 2006 and March 5, 2008, respectively, in CAG.R.SP No. 86401.
The antecedents are as follows:
Respondent J.O.S. Managing Builders, Inc. (
JOS Managing Builders
) is the registered owner and developer of the condominium project Aurora Milestone Tower. On December 16, 1997, JOS Managing Builders and respondent EDUPLAN Philippines, Inc. (
EDUPLAN
) entered into a Contract to Sell covering Condominium Unit E, 10
th
 Floor of the Aurora Milestone Tower with an area of 149.72 square meters, more or less. In August 1998, EDUPLAN effected full payment, and in December 1998, JOS Managing Builders and EDUPLAN executed a Deed of Absolute Sale over the condominium unit. Notwithstanding the execution of the deed of sale in favor of EDUPLAN, JOS Managing Builders failed to cause the issuance of a Condominium Certificate of Title over the condominium unit in the name of EDUPLAN. EDUPLAN learned that the lots on which the condominium building project Aurora Milestone Tower was erected had been mortgaged by JOS Managing Builders to petitioner United Overseas Bank of the Philippines (
United Overseas Bank
) without the prior written approval of the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (
HLURB
). Due to the inability of JOS Managing Builders to deliver the condominium certificate of title covering the unit purchased by EDUPLAN, the latter filed a complaint for specific performance and damages against JOS Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank before the HLURB praying that: (a) the mortgage between JOS Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank be declared null and void; (b) JOS Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank be compelled to cause the issuance and release of the Condominium Certificate of Title; and (c) JOS Managing Builders be ordered to provide emergency power facilities, to refund the monthly telephone carrier charges, and to permanently cease and desist from further collecting such charges.
In its defense, JOS Managing Builders alleged that it could not issue an individual Condominium Certificate of Title in favor of EDUPLAN, because petitioner United Overseas Bank has custody of the Transfer Certificates of Title covering the condominium building.
United Overseas Bank, on the other hand, alleged that JOS Managing Builders is the owner of several parcels of land covered by Transfer Certificate of Title (TCT) Nos. N-146444, N-146445 and N-143601. On April 3, 1997, JOS Managing Builders executed in favor of United Overseas Bank a Real Estate Mortgage
[3]
 over the said parcels of land and the improvements existing or to be erected thereon to secure the Two Hundred Million Peso (PhP200,000,000.00)
[4]
 loan it acquired from the bank. The subject condominium building project Aurora Milestone Tower, which is situated in the said parcels of land, are part of the properties mortgaged to United Overseas Bank. JOS Managing Builders defaulted in the payment of its loan obligations to United Overseas Bank. Hence, United Overseas Bank foreclosed the mortgage constituted over properties of JOS Managing Builders and the subject properties were sold by public auction on March 22, 1999 wherein United Overseas Bank was declared as the highest bidder. Subsequently, a certificate of sale was issued in favor of United Overseas Bank corresponding to the foreclosed properties, which was registered with the Register of Deeds of Quezon City on April 27, 1999.
On August 15, 2001, the HLURB Arbiter ruled,
[5]
 in favor of EDUPLAN and declared the mortgage executed between JOS Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank as well as the foreclosure proceedings null and void, pointing out that the mortgage was executed without the approval of the HLURB as required under Section 18 of Presidential Decree (
P.D.
) No. 957.
[6]
 The Arbiter held that that since EDUPLAN has paid the full purchase price of the condominium unit, JOS Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank should cause the release from encumbrance of the mother titles to the condominium building project, and issue the corresponding condominium certificate of title in favor of EDUPLAN. Further, JOS Managing Builders should provide EDUPLAN with emergency power facilities and refund it with the monthly telephone carrier charges it has been collecting since September 1999, and permanently cease and desist from further imposing and collecting such fees. Moreover, JOS Managing Builders was directed to pay EDUPLAN damages, attorney's fees and costs of suit. The dispositive portion of the decision reads:
Wherefore, the foregoing premises considered and as prayed for, judgment is hereby rendered in favor of the Complainant and against the Respondents as follows:
1. Declaring the mortgage executed by Respondent J.O.S. Managing Builders in favor of Respondent United Overseas Bank (Westmont) as null and void, including the foreclosure of the mortgage, for being in violation of Section 18 of P.D. 957;
2.  Ordering Respondents to cause the release from the encumbrances of the "mother titles" to the Condominium Building Project and, issuance of the individual Condominium Certificate of Title of Complainant to its Condominium Unit, free from any and all liens and encumbrances;
3.  Ordering Respondent J.O.S. Managing Builders to provide the Complainant with emergency power facilities, strictly as represented in its sales brochures;
4.  Ordering Respondent J.O.S. Managing Builders to refund to Complainant the monthly telephone carrier charges it has been collecting since September 1, 1999 and permanently cease and desist from further imposing and collecting said charges;
5.  Ordering Respondent J.O.S. to pay the complainant P100,000.00 by way of temperate damages, P50,000.00 by way of exemplary damages, P40,000.00 as and by way of Attorney's Fees; and the costs of suit.
6.  Ordering Respondent J.O.S. Managing Builders to pay Respondent United Overseas Bank (Westmont) the loan release value of the subject condominium unit.
United Overseas Bank then filed a petition for review with the HLURB. On August 20, 2004, the HLURB Board of Commissioners affirmed the Arbiter's decision, but deleted the award of emergency power facilities and refund of the monthly telephone carrier charges. Hence, United Overseas Bank filed a petition for review under Rule 43 before the CA.
[7]
On February 27, 2006, the CA dismissed the petition.
[8]
 A motion for reconsideration was filed, but it was denied for lack of merit.
[9]
 The CA held that United Overseas Bank did not exhaust the administrative remedies available to it due to its failure to appeal the decision of the HLURB Board of Commissioners to the Office of the President before going to the CA.
Hence, the petition assigning the lone error:
THE COURT OF APPEALS ERRED IN REFUSING TO APPLY THE EXCEPTION TO THE DOCTRINE OF EXHAUSTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.
[10]
Petitioner United Overseas Bank argues that the CA erred when it dismissed the petition due to its failure to exhaust administrative remedies. It alleges that the question on whether the HLURB is correct in declaring null and void the entire mortgage constituted by JOS Managing Builders in favor of United Overseas Bank, as well as the foreclosure of the entire mortgage, is a legal question which is an exception to the rule on exhaustion of administrative remedies.
The petition is meritorious.
The doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies is a cornerstone of our judicial system. The thrust of the rule is that courts must allow administrative agencies to carry out their functions and discharge their responsibilities within the specialized areas of their respective competence.
[11]
 It has been held, however, that the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies and the doctrine of primary jurisdiction are not iron-clad rules. In the case of 
Republic v. Lacap
,
[12]
 the Court enumerated the numerous exceptions to these rules, namely: (a) where there is estoppel on the part of the party invoking the doctrine; (b) where the challenged administrative act is patently illegal, amounting to lack of jurisdiction; (c) where there is unreasonable delay or official inaction that will irretrievably prejudice the complainant; (d) where the amount involved is relatively so small as to make the rule impractical and oppressive; (e) 
where the question involved is purely legal and will ultimately have to be decided by the courts of justice
; (f) where judicial intervention is urgent; (g) where the application of the doctrine may cause great and irreparable damage; (h) where the controverted acts violate due process; (i) where the issue of non-exhaustion of administrative remedies has been rendered moot; (j) where there is no other plain, speedy and adequate remedy; (k) where strong public interest is involved; and (1) in 
quo warranto
 proceedings.
[13]
The situation in paragraph (e) of the foregoing enumeration obtains in this case.
The issue on whether non-compliance with the clearance requirement with the HLURB would result to the nullification of the entire mortgage contract or only a part of it is purely legal which will have to be decided ultimately by a regular court of law. It does not involve an examination of the probative value of the evidence presented by the parties. There is a question of law when the doubt or difference arises as to what the law is on a certain state of facts, and not as to the truth or the falsehood of alleged facts. Said question at best could be resolved only 
tentatively
 by the administrative authorities. The final decision on the matter rests not with them but with the courts of justice. Exhaustion of administrative remedies does not apply, because nothing of an administrative nature is to be or can be done. The issue does not require technical knowledge and experience, but one that would involve the interpretation and application of law.
[14]
 There is, thus, no need to exhaust administrative remedies, under the premises.
The Court will now proceed to the legal issue on hand.
Petitioner United Overseas Bank alleges that the HLURB erred in declaring null and void the entire mortgage constituted by JOS Managing Builders in its favor, as EDUPLAN does not claim ownership over all the properties mortgaged by JOS Managing Builders in favor of United Overseas Bank, but only over a single condominium unit, 
i.e.
, Unit E, 10
th
 Floor of the Aurora Milestone Tower.
We agree with petitioner.
The HLURB erred in declaring 
null and void the entire mortgage 
executed between JOS Managing 
Builders and United Overseas Bank
.
At the onset, it is worthy to note that jurisprudence have varying conclusions of the issue at hand. In 
Far East Bank & Trust Co. v Marquez
,
[15]
 the Court sustained the HLURB when it declared the mortgage entered into between the subdivision developer and the bank as unenforceable against the lot buyer for failure of the developer to obtain the prior written approval of the HLURB. However, we were categorical that the HLURB acted beyond bounds when it nullified the mortgage covering the entire parcel of land, of which the lot subject of the buyer's complaint is merely a part of.
In 
Far East Bank
, the Court held that:
Acts executed against the provisions of mandatory or prohibitory laws shall be void. Hence, the 
mortgage
 over the lot is 
null and void insofar as private respondent is concerned
.
The remedy granted by the HLURB and sustained by the Office of the President is proper only insofar as it refers to the lot of respondent. 
In short, the mortgage contract is void as against him. Since there is no law stating the specifics of what should be done under the circumstances, that which is in accord with equity, should be ordered. The remedy granted by the HLURB in the first and the second paragraphs of the dispositive portion of its Decision insofar as it referred to respondent's lot is in accord with equity.
The HLURB, however, went overboard in its disposition in paragraphs 3 and 4, which pertained not only to the lot but to the entire parcel of land mortgaged. Such ruling was improper. The subject of this litigation is limited only to the lot that respondent is buying, not to the entire parcel of land. He has no personality or standing to bring suit on the whole property, as he has actionable interest over the subject lot only.
 (Citations omitted and underscoring ours)
[16]
In 
Metropolitan Bank and Trust Co., Inc. v. SLGT Holdings, Inc.
,
[17]
 however, the Court nullified the entire mortgage contract executed between the subdivision developer and the bank albeit the fact that only two units or lot buyer/s filed a case for declaration of nullity of mortgage. In the said case, the entire mortgage contract was nullified on the basis of the principle of indivisibility of mortgage as provided in Article 2089
[18]
 of the New Civil Code.
This notwithstanding, in the fairly recent case of 
Philippine National Bank v. Lim
,
[19]
 the Court reverted to our previous ruling in 
Far East Bank
 that a unit buyer has no standing to seek for the complete nullification of the entire mortgage, because he has an actionable interest only over the unit he has bought. Hence, in the said case, the mortgage was nullified only insofar as it affected the unit buyer.
We find the recent view espoused in 
Philippine National Bank
 to be in accord with law and equity. While a mortgage may be nullified if it was in violation of Section 18 of P.D. No. 957, such nullification applies only to the interest of the complaining buyer. It cannot extend to the entire mortgage. A buyer of a particular unit or lot has no standing to ask for the nullification of the entire mortgage.
Since EDUPLAN has an actionable interest only over Unit E, 10
th
 Floor, Aurora Milestone Tower, it is but logical to conclude that it has no standing to seek for the complete nullification of the subject mortgage and the HLURB was incorrect when it voided the whole mortgage between JOS Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank.
Considering that EDUPLAN had already paid the full purchase price of the subject unit, the latter is entitled to the transfer of ownership of the subject property in its favor. This right is provided for in Section 25 of P.D. No. 957, 50 wit:
Issuance of Title
. The owner or development shall deliver the title of the lot or unit to the buyer upon full payment of the lot or unit, x x x.
Verily, JOS Managing Builders has the obligation to cause the delivery of the Title to the subject condominium unit in favor of EDUPALN.
Nevertheless, despite the fact that the mortgage constituted between JOS Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank cannot bind EDUPLAN, because of the non-observance of the provision of P.D. No. 957 by JOS managing Builders, the mortgage between the former and United Overseas Bank is still valid.
In the present case, it is undisputed that JOS Managing Builders mortgaged several parcels of land, including all the buildings and improvements therein covered by TCT Nos. N-146444, N-146445 and N-143601 to United Overseas Bank without prior clearance from the HLURB. The said omission clearly violates Section 18 of P.D. No. 957 (
The Subdivision and condominium Buyers' Protective Decree
), which provides as follows:
Section 18. Mortgages. - No mortgage on any unit or lot shall be made by the owner or developer without prior written approval of the [HLURB]. xxx (
Word in bracket added
)
It should be noted, however, that the failure of JOS Managing Builders to secure prior approval of the mortgage from the HLURB and United Overseas Bank's failure to inquire on the status of the property offered for mortgage placed the condominium developer and the creditor Bank in 
pari delicto
.
[20]
 Hence, they cannot ask the courts for relief for such parties should be left where they are found for being equally at fault.
More importantly, it should be understood that the prior approval requirement is intended to protect buyers of condominium units from fraudulent manipulations perpetrated by unscrupulous condominium sellers and operators, such as their failure to deliver titles to the buyer or titles free from lien and encumbrances.
[21]
 This is pursuant to the intent of P.D. No. 957 to protect hapless buyers from the unjust practices of unscrupulous developers which may constitute mortgages over condominium projects sans the knowledge of the former and the consent of the HLURB.
[22]
Thus, failure to secure the HLURB'S prior written approval as required by P.D. No. 957 will not annul the entire mortgage between the condominium developer and the creditor bank, otherwise the protection intended for condominium buyers will inadvertently be extended to the condominium developer even though, by failing to secure the government's prior approval, it is the party at fault.
To rule otherwise would certainly affect the stability of large-scale mortgages, which is prevalent in the real estate industry. To be sure, mortgagee banks would be indubitably placed at risk if condominium developers are empowered to unilaterally invalidate mortgage contracts based on their mere failure to secure prior written approval of the mortgage by the HLURB, which could be easily caused by inadvertence or by deliberate intent.
From all the foregoing, the HLURB erred when it declared the entire mortgage constituted by JOS Managing Builders, Inc. in favor of United Overseas Bank null and void based solely on the complaint of EDUPLAN which was only claiming ownership over a single condominium unit of Aurora Milestone Tower. Accordingly, the mortgage executed between JOS Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank is valid.
WHEREFORE
, the petition is 
GRANTED
. The Decision and Resolution of the Court of Appeals, dated February 27, 2006 and March 5, 2008, respectively, in CA-G.R. SP No. 86401, are 
REVERSED
 and 
SET ASIDE
. The Decision of the HLURB, dated August 20, 2004, is 
AFFIRMED with MODIFICATION
. The mortgage executed and the succeeding foreclosure proceedings between respondent J.O.S. Managing Builders, Inc. and petitioner United Overseas Bank of the Philippines, Inc., with respect to respondent EDUPLAN Philippines, Inc.'s unit E., 10
TH
 Floor, Aurora Milestone Tower, is declared null and void.
SO ORDERED.
Sereno, C.J., Carpio, Leonardo-De Castro, Villarama, Jr., Perez, Mendoza, Reyes
, and 
Jardeleza, JJ.
, concur. 
Bersamin, J.
, please see concurring opinion.
Leonen, J.
, see separate concurring and dissenting opinion.
Perlas-Bernabe, J.
, I am joining the opinion of 
J
. Leonen.
Brion, J.
, on leave. 
C.J.
 Sereno certifies that 
J
. Brion left his dissenting opinion.
Del Castillo, J.
, joins 
J
. Brion in his dissenting opinion.
Velasco, Jr., J.
, on leave. 
NOTICE OF JUDGMENT
Sirs/Mesdames:
Please take notice that on 
June 23, 2015
 a 
Decision
/Resolution, copy attached herewith, was rendered by the Supreme Court in the above-entitled case, the original of which was received by this Office on August 25, 2015 at 1:35 p.m.
Very truly yours,
(SGD.)
FELIPA G. BORLONGAN-ANAMA
Clerk of Court
[1]
 Penned by Associate Justice Portia Alino-Hormachuelos, with Associate Justices Amelita G. Tolentino and Vicente S. E. Veloso, concurring; 
rollo
, pp. 15-22. 
[2]
 
Rollo
, pp. 24-29.
[3]
 CA 
rollo
, pp. 102-103.
[4]
 This amount was later on increased to PhP250,000,000.00 by virtue of an Amendment of Real Estate Mortgage, 
id.
 at 105.
[5]
 CA 
rollo
, pp. 52-63.
[6]
 The Subdivision and Condominium Buyers Protective Decree.
[7]
 
Rollo
, pp. 23-25.
[8]
 
Id.
 at 15-22.
[9]
 
Id.
 at 24-29.
[10]
 
Id.
 at 37.
[11]
 
Universal Robina Corp. (Corn Division) v. Laguna Lake Development Authority
, G.R No. 191427, May 30, 2011, 649 SCRA 506, 511.
[12]
 546 Phil. 87 (2007).
[13]
 
Republic v. Lacap, supra
, at 97-98. (Underscoring supplied)
[14]
 
Vigilar v. Aquino
, G.R. No. 180388, January 18, 2011, 639 SCRA 772, 778, citing 
Republic v. Lacap, supra
 note 12, at 98.
[15]
 465 Phil. 276 (2004).
[16]
 
Far East Bank & Trust Co. v. Marquez, supra
, at 298, cited in 
Philippine National Bank v. Lim,
 
supra
 note 15, at 543-544.
[17]
 G.R. Nos. 175181-82 and G.R. Nos. 175354 & 175387-88, September 14, 2007, 533 SCRA 516.
[18]
 Article 2089. A pledge or mortgage is indivisible, even though the debt may be divided among the successors-in-interest of the debtor or of the creditor, x x x.
[19]
 G.R. No. 171677, January 30, 2013, 689 SCRA 523, 543, citing 
Manila Banking Corporation v. Rabina
, G.R. No. 145941, December 16, 2008, 574 SCRA 16, 23.
[20]
 The 
pari delicto
 rule provides that when two parties are equally at fault, the law leaves them as they are and denies recovery by either one of them. (
Land Bank of the Philippines v. Poblete
, G.R. No. 196577, February 25, 2013, 691 SCRA 613).
[21]
 See third 
Whereas
 Clause of P.D. No. 957.
[22]
 
Id.
CONCURRING OPINION
BERSAMIN, 
J
.:
The
 legal issue for resolution concerns the validity of the mortgage 
constituted between petitioner bank and respondent developer of a 
condominium project under Section 18 of Presidential Decree No. 957 (
The Subdivision and Condominium Buyers' Protective Decree
) to secure the performance of the latter's obligations in favor of the former.
Our
 relevant existing jurisprudence is settled insofar as declaring that 
the failure to obtain the prior written approval of the Housing and Land
 Use Regulatory Board (HLURB) renders the mortgage null and void. 
However, a conflict exists as to the extent of the nullity of the 
mortgage.
On the one hand, the Court has pronounced in 
Metropolitan Bank and Trust Co., Inc. v. SLGT Holdings, Inc.
[1]
 that the nullity extends to the entire mortgage, opining:
x
 x x This disposition stems from the basic postulate that a mortgage 
contract is, by nature, indivisible. Consequent to this feature, a 
debtor cannot ask for the release of any portion of the mortgaged 
property or of one or some of the several properties mortgaged unless 
and until the loan thus secured has been fully paid, notwithstanding the
 fact that there has been partial fulfillment of the obligation. Hence, 
it is provided that the debtor who has paid a part of the debt cannot 
ask for the proportionate extinguishments of the mortgage as long as the
 debt is not completely satisfied.
The situation obtaining in the
 case at bench is within the purview of the aforesaid rule on the 
indivisibility of mortgage. It may be that Section 18 of PD 957 allows 
partial redemption of the mortgage in the sense that the buyer is 
entitled to pay his installment for the lot or unit directly to the 
mortgagee so as to enable him - the said buyer - to obtain title over 
the lot or unit after full payment thereof. Such accommodation 
statutorily given to a unit/lot buyer does not, however, render the 
mortgage contract also divisible. Generally, the divisibility of the 
principal obligation is not affected by the indivisibility of the 
mortgage. The real estate mortgage voluntarily constituted by the debtor
 (ASB) on the lots or units is one and indivisible. In this case, the 
mortgage contract executed between ASB and the petitioner banks is 
considered indivisible, that is, it cannot be divided among the 
different buildings or units of the Project. Necessarily, partial 
extinguishment of the mortgage cannot be allowed. In the same token, the
 annulment of the mortgage is an all or nothing proposition. It cannot 
be divided into valid or invalid parts. The mortgage is either valid in 
its entirety or not valid at all. In the present case, there is 
doubtless only one mortgage to speak of. Ergo, a declaration of nullity 
for violation of Section 18 of PD 957 should result to the mortgage 
being nullified wholly.
[2]
On the other hand, the Court has ruled in 
Far East Bank and Trust Co. v. Marquez
[3]

 that the mortgage is void only with respect to the portion of the 
property under mortgage that is the subject of the litigation, 
explaining:
The lot was mortgaged in violation of Section
 18 of PD 957. Respondent, who was the buyer of the property, was not 
notified of the mortgage before the release of the loan proceeds by 
petitioner. Acts executed against the provisions of mandatory or 
prohibitory laws shall be void. Hence, the mortgage over the lot is null
 and void insofar as private respondent is concerned.
The remedy 
granted by the HLURB and sustained by the Office of the President is 
proper only insofar as it refers to the lot of respondent. In short, the
 mortgage contract is void as against him. Since there is no law stating
 the specifics of what should be done under the circumstances, that 
which is in accord with equity should be ordered. The remedy granted by 
the HLURB in the first and the second paragraphs of the dispositive 
portion of its Decision insofar as it referred to respondent's lot is in
 accord with equity.
The HLURB, however, went overboard in its 
disposition in paragraphs 3 and 4, which pertained not only to the lot 
but to the entire parcel of land mortgaged. Such ruling was improper. 
The subject of this litigation is limited only to the lot that 
respondent is buying, not to the entire parcel of land. He has no 
personality or standing to bring suit on the whole property, as he has 
actionable interest over the subject lot only.
[4]
Far East Bank and Trust Co. v. Marquez
 has been reiterated in 
Philippine National Bank v. Lim
.
[5]
Before resolving the conflict, let us look at the established facts of this case.
Respondent
 EDUPLAN Philippines Inc. (EDUPLAN) bought a condominium unit with an 
area of 149.72 square meters, more or less, known as Unit E located in 
the 10
th
 Floor of the Aurora Milestone Tower, from respondent
 J.O.S. Managing Builders, Inc. (J.O.S. Managing Builders) under a 
contract to sell. In August 1998, EDUPLAN effected full payment; hence, 
J.O.S. Managing Builders and EDUPLAN executed their deed of absolute 
sale in December 1998. Despite the execution of the deed of absolute 
sale, J.O.S. Managing Builders did not deliver the condominium 
certificate of title to EDUPLAN, which, in due time, discovered that the
 lots on which the condominium project was being constructed had been 
made the subject of the mortgage by J.O.S. Managing Builders in favor of
 United Overseas Bank without the prior written approval of the HLURB.
Consequently,
 EDUPLAN filed its complaint for specific performance and damages 
against J.O.S. Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank in the HLURB, 
praying, among others, that the mortgage between J.O.S. Managing 
Builders and United Overseas Bank be declared null and void.
On August 15, 2001, the HLURB Arbiter rendered a decision declaring, 
inter alia
,
 that the mortgage between J.O.S. Managing Builders and United Overseas 
Bank and the foreclosure of the mortgage were null and void for being in
 violation of Section 18 of P.D. No. 957.
United Overseas Bank 
brought its petition for review to the HLURB Board of Commissioners, 
which, on August 20, 2004, affirmed the HLURB Arbiter's decision with 
modification.
United Overseas Bank elevated the case to the Court
 of Appeals (CA), which affirmed the HLURB Board of Commissioners 
through the now assailed judgment promulgated on February 27, 2006.
The
 CA also denied United Overseas Bank's motion for reconsideration, 
observing that United Overseas Bank did not exhaust administrative 
remedies due to its failure to appeal the decision of the HLURB Board of
 Commissioners to the Office of the President before filing its petition
 for review in the CA.
In its present appeal, United Overseas 
Bank raises as the lone error of the CA the refusal to apply the 
exception to the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies.
The
 very erudite main opinion written by Justice Peralta considers the 
petition meritorious. Firstly, it says that this case presents a purely 
legal question - whether failure to obtain prior written approval of the
 HLURB would result to the nullification of the entire mortgage contract
 - that will eventually be decided by the courts. With the presence of 
such recognized exception, the rule on exhaustion of administrative 
remedies need not strictly apply. It insists anent the legal issue that 
the HLURB erred in declaring the entire mortgage executed between J.O.S.
 Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank null and void in view of the
 pronouncement in 
Philippine National Bank v. Lim
 because 
although the mortgage could be nullified if it was in violation of 
Section 18 of P.D. No. 957, the nullification should apply only to the 
interest of the complaining buyer, and should not extend to the entire 
mortgage considering that the buyer of a particular unit or lot has no 
standing to ask for the nullification of the entire mortgage. It 
explains that the principle of indivisibility of mortgage under Article 
2089 of the Civil Code cannot be applied herein because Section 18 of 
P.D. No. 957 expressly allows the proportionate extinguishment of a 
mortgage upon payment of the debt corresponding to the lot or unit of a 
particular buyer; that it follows that the mortgage can be partially 
nullified insofar as it affects the complaining party; and that the 
mortgage executed and the succeeding foreclosure proceedings between 
J.O.S. Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank were consequently null
 and void only with respect to EDUPLAN's Unit E at the 10
th
 Floor of the Aurora Milestone Tower.
I 
CONCUR

 with the main opinion in its declaration that the mortgage contract 
between J.O.S. Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank should be 
declared null and void only insofar as it concerns EDUPLAN's condominium
 unit.
The general rule that a mortgage is an indivisible contract
[6]
 applies only between the contracting parties where a debtor-creditor relationship exists. This the Court has made clear in 
Belo v. Philippine National Bank
,
[7]
 declaring:
There
 is no dispute that the mortgage on the four (4) parcels of land by the 
Eslabon spouses and the other mortgage on the property of Eduarda Belo 
both secure the loan obligation of respondents spouses Eslabon to 
respondent PNB. However, we are not persuaded by the contention of the 
respondent PNB that the indivisibility concept applies to the right of 
redemption of an accommodation mortgagor and her assignees. The 
jurisprudence in 
Philippine National Bank v. Agudelo
 is enlightening to the case at bar, to wit:
x x x                    x x x                    x x x
However,
 Paz Agudelo y Gonzaga (the principal) ... gave her consent to the lien 
on lot No. 878 .... This acknowledgment however, does not extend to lots
 Nos. 207 and 61 ... inasmuch as, 
although it is true that a mortgage
 is indivisible as to the contracting parties and as to their successors
 in interest (Article 1860, Civil code), it is not so with respect to a 
third person who did not take part in the constitution thereof either 
personally or through an agent
 x x x. Therefore, the only liability 
of the defendant-appellant Paz Agudelo y Gonzaga is that which arises 
from the aforesaid acknowledgment but only with respect to the lien and 
not to the principal obligation secured by the mortgage acknowledged by 
her to have been constituted on said lot No. 878 .... Such liability is 
not direct but a subsidiary one.
x x x                    x x x                    x x x
Wherefore, it is 
hereby held that the liability contracted by the aforesaid 
defendant-appellant Paz Agudelo y Gonzaga is merely subsidiary to that 
of Mauro A. Garrucho (the agent), limited to lot No. 87.
x x x                    x x x                    x x x
From
 the wordings of the law, indivisibility arises only when there is a 
debt, that is, there is a debtor-creditor relationship. But, this 
relationship is wanting in the case at bar in the sense that petitioners
 are assignees of an accommodation mortgagor and not of a 
debtor-mortgagor. Hence, it is fair and logical to allow the petitioners
 to redeem only the property belonging to their assignor, Eduarda Belo.
Although
 the concept of indivisibility does not apply to the unit buyers of the 
condominium project because they are not parties to the principal 
contract of loan and the mortgage, the agreements that they enter into 
with the developer nevertheless affect the nature of the mortgage. In 
consideration of the agreements and conformably with the governing law, I
 humbly opine that the mortgage contract between J.O.S. Managing 
Builders and United Overseas Bank is not indivisible in this context.
To
 begin with, there are certain factors that may be considered to 
properly determine whether an obligation is divisible or indivisible, 
namely: (1) the will or intention of the parties, which may be express 
or presumed; (2) the objective or purpose of the stipulated prestation; 
(3) the nature of the thing; and (4) provisions of law affecting the 
prestation.
[8]
In a 
real estate mortgage, the object or prestation does not refer to the 
lots or units mortgaged, but to the security given by the debtor to the 
creditor to guarantee the fulfillment of the principal obligation. 
However, unlike in the case of ordinary mortgage contracts, the 
provisions of P.D. No. 957 are embedded in the mortgage contract between
 J.O.S. Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank, particularly Section
 18 which states:
Section 18. 
Mortgages
. No 
mortgage on any unit or lot shall be made by the owner or developer 
without prior written approval of the Authority. Such approval shall not
 be granted unless it is shown that the proceeds of the mortgage loan 
shall be used for the development of the condominium or subdivision 
project and effective measures have been provided to ensure such 
utilization. The loan value of each lot or unit covered by the mortgage 
shall be determined and the buyer thereof, if any, shall be notified 
before the release of the loan. 
The buyer may, at his option, pay his
 installment for the lot or unit directly to the mortgagee who shall 
apply the payments to the corresponding mortgage indebtedness secured by
 the particular lot or unit being paid for, with a view to enabling said
 buyer to obtain title over the lot or unit promptly after full payment 
thereto.
It is easily discernible from Section 18 
that the partial extinguishment of the mortgage corresponding to a 
particular lot or unit that is meanwhile fully paid for is expressly 
permitted. As such, Section 18 affects the prestation of the mortgage 
because it releases a portion that no longer belongs to the 
mortgagor-developer and thus ceases to be the object of its mortgage.
[9]
 In short, Section 18 of P.D. No. 957 renders mortgages of this nature divisible.
By
 virtue of Section 18 of P.D. No. 957, the parties of the mortgage 
become bound to respect the agreements from which the rights of lot or 
unit buyers arise. The Court has fittingly observed in 
Philippine National Bank v. Dee
:
[10]
Nevertheless,
 despite the apparent validity of the mortgage between the petitioner 
and PEPI, the former is still bound to respect the transactions between 
respondents PEPI and Dee. The petitioner was well aware that the 
properties mortgaged by PEPI were also the subject of existing contracts
 to sell with other buyers. While it may be that the petitioner is 
protected by Act No. 3135, as amended, it cannot claim any superior 
right as against the installment buyers. This is because the contract 
between the respondents is protected by P.D. No. 957, a social justice 
measure enacted primarily to protect innocent lot buyers. Thus, in 
Luzon Development Bank v. Enriquez
,
 the Court reiterated the rule that a bank dealing with a property that 
is already subject of a contract to sell and is protected by the 
provisions of P.D. No. 957, is bound by the contract to sell.
However, the transferee BANK is bound by the Contract to Sell and has to respect Enriquez's rights thereunder. 
This is because the Contract to Sell, involving a subdivision lot, is covered and protected by PD 957.
 x x x.
x x x                    x x x                    x x x
xxx
 Under these circumstances, the BANK knew or should have known of the 
possibility and risk that the assigned properties were already covered 
by existing contracts to sell in favor of subdivision lot. buyers. As 
observed by the Court in another case involving a bank regarding a 
subdivision lot that was already subject of a contract to sell with a 
third party:
[The Bank] should have considered that it 
was dealing with a property subject of a real estate development 
project. A reasonable person, particularly a financial institution x x 
x, should have been aware that, to finance the project, funds other than
 those obtained from the loan could have been used to serve the purpose,
 albeit partially. Hence, there was a need to verify whether any part of
 the property was already intended to be the subject of any other 
contract involving buyers or potential buyers. In granting the loan, 
[the Bank] should not have been content merely with a clean title, 
considering the presence of circumstances indicating the need for a 
thorough investigation of the existence of buyers x x x. Wanting in care
 and prudence, the [Bank] cannot be deemed to be an innocent mortgagee, x
 x x
The possibility exists 
that the developer's principal obligation with the financial institution
 will eventually become unsecured should all unit buyers of the 
condominium project effect full payment. In consideration of this 
possibility, the mortgage between J.O.S. Managing Builders and United 
Overseas Bank should be construed as divisible instead of indivisible. 
Hence, the nullity of the mortgage contract should be confined only to 
the interest of the complaining buyer, EDUPLAN.
I should stress 
that the right to set up the nullity of a void or nonÂ­existent contract 
is not limited to the parties, as in the case of annullable or voidable 
contracts. Under Article 1421 of the 
Civil Code
, the defense of the illegality of a contract is available to third persons whose interests are directly affected.
[11]
The
 interests of EDUPLAN, while not a party to the mortgage contract 
between J.O.S. Managing Builders and United Overseas Bank, are directly 
affected if the mortgage and its foreclosure were to be upheld. Even so,
 EDUPLAN, not being directly injured by the foreclosure of the other 
units, has no right to bring an action in behalf of the other unit 
buyers because its actionable interest is limited to its purchased unit.
 Indeed, Section 2, Rule 3 of the 
Rules of Court
 generally limits the right of action only to the real party-in-interest, 
viz
:
Sec. 2. 
Parties in interest
.
 - A real party in interest is the party who stands to be benefited or 
injured by the judgment in the suit, or the party entitled to the avails
 of the suit. Unless otherwise authorized by law or these Rules, every 
action must be prosecuted or defended in the name of the real party in 
interest.
Interest
 within the meaning of this 
rule means material interest, or an interest in issue to be affected by 
the decree or judgment of the case, as distinguished from mere curiosity
 about the question involved. Accordingly, a real party in interest is 
the party who, by the substantive law, has the right sought to be 
enforced.
[12]
 Following 
Philippine National Bank v. Lim, supra
, the HLURB really went overboard in voiding the entire mortgage without an action being filed by 
all
 the real parties in interest.
The
 fear exists that this interpretation may result in the filing of 
multiple actions for the annulment of mortgage and foreclosure 
proceedings by unit buyers of condominium projects. The situation is not
 necessarily adverse to procedural orderliness, however, because the 
Rules of Court
 may partly address it under the rule on the permissive joinder of parties. Thus, Rule 3, Section 6 of the 
Rules of Court
, which embodies the rule on permissive joinder of parties, states:
Sec. 6. 
Permissive joinder of parties
.
 - All persons in whom or against whom any right to relief in respect to
 or arising out of the same transaction or series of transactions is 
alleged to exist, whether jointly, severally, or in the alternative, 
may, except as otherwise provided in these Rules, join as plaintiffs or 
be joined as defendants in one complaint, where any question of law or 
fact common to all such plaintiffs or to all such defendants may arise 
in the action; but the court may make such orders as may be just to 
prevent any plaintiff or defendant from being embarrassed or put to 
expense in connection with any proceedings in which he may have no 
interest.
IN VIEW OF THE FOREGOING
, I vote to 
GRANT
 the petition for review on 
certiorari
.
[1]
 G.R. Nos. 175181-82 and G.R. Nos. 175354 & 175387-88, September 14, 2007, 533 SCRA 516.
[2]
 
Id.
 at 527-528.
[3]
 G.R. No. 147964, January 20, 2004, 420 SCRA 349.
[4]
 
Id.
 at 357-358.
[5]
 G.R. No. 171677, January 30, 2013, 689 SCRA 523.
[6]
 Article 2089, 
Civil Code
.
[7]
 G.R. No. 134330, March 1, 2001, 353 SCRA 359, 378-379.
[8]
 IV Tolentino, 
Civil Code of the Philippines
, (1999), p. 255.
[9]
 Article 2085, 
Civil Code
.
[10]
 G.R. No. 182128, February 19, 2014, 717 SCRA 14, 25-26.
[11]
 See also 
Heirs of Policronio M. Ureta, Sr. v. Heirs of Liberate M. Ureta
, G.R. No. 165748, September 14, 2011, 657 SCRA 555, 589.
[12]
 
Ang v. Ang
, G.R. No. 186993, August 22, 2012, 678 SCRA 699, 707-708.
CONCURRING AND DISSENTING OPINION
LEONEN, 
J
.:
The
 case involves the doctrines on exhaustion of administrative remedies 
and void mortgage contracts under Section 18 of Presidential Decree No. 
957.
[1]
This is a Petition for Review on 
Certiorari

 assailing the Decision dated February 27, 2006 and Resolution dated 
March 5, 2008 of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. SP No. 86401.
[2]

 The Court of Appeals dismissed petitioner's Petition for Review under 
Rule 43 of the Rules of Court for failure to exhaust administrative 
remedies available to petitioner.
Respondent J.O.S. Managing 
Builders, Inc. (JOS) is the registered owner and developer of Aurora 
Milestone Tower (the condominium project).
[3] 
The condominium project is located on Aurora Boulevard, Quezon City.
JOS
 mortgaged the condominium project, among other properties, to Far East 
Bank and Trust Co. (Far East). The properties were security for JOS loan
 of P112,002,000.00.
However, as requested by JOS, petitioner United Overseas Bank (UOB) assumed the indebtedness of JOS with Far East.
[4]

 The mortgage was released on April 15, 1997 for P200 million, which 
represented JOS principal loan plus interest. The mortgaged properties 
transfer certificates of title were delivered to UOB as the new 
mortgagee. UOB did not secure a mortgage clearance from the Housing and 
Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB).
JOS failed to pay its loan with UOB.
[5]

 The real estate mortgage was then foreclosed, and UOB was declared as 
the highest bidder in the public auction held on March 22, 1999.
[6]
In the meantime, on December 16, 1997, JOS and EDUPLAN Phils., Inc. (EDUPLAN) entered into a contract to sell.
[7]
 The contract covered Unit E, 10
th
 Floor of the condominium project. The cost of the unit was P9,028,116.00 payable in installments within six (6) years.
EDUPLAN fully paid JOS on August 24, 1998.
[8]
 The parties then executed a Deed of Absolute Sale
[9]
 where it was disclosed that there was a mortgage lien in favor of UOB.
[10]
JOS
 was not able to issue the individual condominium certificate of title 
in favor of EDUPLAN as UOB had custody of the transfer certificate of 
title covering the condominium building.
[11]
On
 February 11, 2000, EDUPLAN filed a Complaint for specific performance 
and damages against JOS and UOB before the HLURB Arbiter.
[12]
 The Complaint prayed for the following reliefs:
(a)
 that the mortgage between JOS and UOB be declared void; (b) that [JOS 
and EDUPLAN] be compelled to issue and release the condominium 
certificate of title; and (c) that JOS be ordered to provide emergency 
power facilities, to refund the monthly telephone carrier charges, and 
to permanently cease and desist from further collecting such charges.
[13]
The HLURB Arbiter issued a Decision in favor of EDUPLAN on August 15, 2001.
[14]

 The Decision declared that the mortgage between JOS and UOB, including 
the foreclosure proceedings, was void for violating Section 18 of 
Presidential Decree No. 957. Moreover, the HLURB Arbiter ruled that 
since EDUPLAN had already fully paid for the condominium unit, JOS and 
UOB should cause the release of the title to the condominium building or
 the "mother title" free from all liens and encumbrances in connection 
with Section 25 of Presidential Decree No. 957. The HLURB Arbiter also 
held that JOS should provide emergency power facilities to EDUPLAN in 
consonance with its sales brochure. JOS should also refund monthly 
telephone carrier charges from September 1, 1999 to EDUPLAN, and stop 
the collection of such fees.
In addition, JOS should pay UOB the 
loan release value of EDUPLAN's unit. JOS was also held liable for 
damages, attorney's fees, and the costs of suit.
[15]
Upon
 UOB's filing of its Petition for Review, the HLURB Board of 
Commissioners affirmed with modification the HLURB Arbiter's Decision.
[16]

 According to the Board of Commissioners, EDUPLAN was entitled to the 
delivery of the title of the fully paid unit under Section 25 of 
Presidential Decree No. 957.
[17]
 JOS had the legal obligation to cause the release of titles despite non-payment of its loan with UOB.
[18]
The
 Board of Commissioners also ruled that JOS and UOB violated Section 18 
of Presidential Decree No. 957 for not securing the Board's prior 
approval before the mortgage was executed.
[19]

 However, the Board of Commissioners found that there was no basis to 
support the refund of the payment for telephone carrier services and the
 order of desistance to collect such and other similar fees.
[20]
The dispositive portion of the August 20, 2004 Decision of the Board of Commissioners provides:
In the light of the foregoing premises, the decision of the Office Below is hereby modified as follows:
The
 mortgage executed by Respondent J.O.S. Managing Builders in favor of 
Respondent United Overseas Bank (Westmont), including the foreclosure of
 the mortgage, is declared as null and void for being in violation of 
Section 18 of Presidential Decree No. 957.
Respondent 
JOS is ordered to cause the release of the mother titles to the Aurora 
Milestone Tower condominium building from the mortgage held by 
Respondent Westmont and to issue an individual Condominium Certificate 
of Title to Complainant over its condominium unit, free from any and all
 liens and encumbrances.
Respondent JOS is ordered to 
pay the Complainant P100,000.00 by way of temperate damages; P50,000.00 
by way of exemplary damages; P40,000.00 as and by way of Attorney's 
Fees; and the costs of suit.
Respondent J.O.S. is ordered to pay respondent Westmont the loan release value of complainant's condominium unit. 
All other claims are hereby dismissed.
So ordered.
[21]
As
 stated earlier, UOB filed a Petition for Review under Rule 43 of the 
Rules of Court before the Court of Appeals. The Court of Appeals 
dismissed the Petition for its belated filing and for failing to exhaust
 administrative remedies.
[22]
 
According to the Court of Appeals, the proper recourse of UOB was to 
file the appeal of the Board of Commissioners' Decision before the 
Office of the President within 15 days from receipt of the Decision.
[23]
On Motion for Reconsideration, the Court of Appeals affirmed its earlier Decision.
[24]
 However, it reconsidered its finding that the Petition was filed out of time.
[25]

 The Court of Appeals also ruled that UOB's argument involving a purely 
legal question was raised for the first time in its Motion and 
Supplemental Motion for Reconsideration.
[26]
The present Petition was filed before this court on May 5, 2008.
[27]
 This court resolved to require JOS and EDUPLAN to submit their Comment on July 16, 2008.
[28]
After
 receipt of JOS' and EDUPLAN's Comments dated September 11, 2008 and 
February 11, 2009, respectively, this court granted UOB's Motion for 
leave and extension of 15 days to file a consolidated Reply.
[29]
UOB's consolidated Reply was noted on June 3, 2009.
[30]
UOB
 raised the lone issue of whether the Court of Appeals erred in not 
applying the exception to the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative 
remedies. However, as noted by the ponencia, the more important issue at
 hand is whether the HLURB's nullification of the entire mortgage over 
the condominium project is proper.
UOB argued that the issues it 
raised before the Court of Appeals were purely legal, with this being a 
proper exception to the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative 
remedies.
[31]
 The Court of 
Appeals erred in dismissing the Petition for Review and calling UOB's 
argument on the exception to the doctrine of exhaustion of 
administrative remedies a "mere afterthought" since UOB raised issues on
 HLURB's jurisdiction and on the patent illegality of HLURB's actions.
[32]
According to UOB, the HLURB went overboard or went beyond its jurisdiction when it declared the entire mortgage void.
[33]
 Citing 
Far East Bank & Trust Co. v. Marquez
,
[34]
 UOB claimed that the mortgage should be declared void only as to Unit E, 10
th

 Floor, Aurora Milestone Tower, or EDUPLAN's unit, since EDUPLAN did not
 have any claim over other units covered by the mortgage.
[35]
Furthermore,
 the burden to comply with Section 18 of Presidential Decree No. 957 
rests on JOS and not on UOB, thus, JOS cannot rely on the law to renege 
on its loan obligations.
[36]
 To allow JOS to do so would "allow JOS to profit from its own misdeed."
[37]
On
 the other hand, EDUPLAN claimed in its Comment that UOB's argument of 
exception to the rule of exhaustion of administrative remedies "was a 
mere afterthought."
[38]
 UOB had all the opportunity to invoke questions of law. However, it remained silent to its detriment.
[39]
 EDUPLAN prayed that this court dismiss the Petition for lack of merit.
[40]
Likewise,
 JOS argued that UOB fatally erred when it appealed the Decision of the 
HLURB Board of Commissioners to the Court of Appeals instead of the 
Office of the President, which the rules specifically provide.
[41]

 This Petition should also be denied as UOB belatedly claimed an 
exception to the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies.
[42]
 Nevertheless, there is no purely legal question involved, thus, the exception is inexistent.
[43]
At
 the outset, what is only questioned in this Petition is the validity of
 the Court of Appeals' ruling with regard to the existence of an 
exception to the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies. 
However, in view of the importance of the issues involved, this court 
must go beyond the issues brought by the parties to this forum.
The doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies is already settled in this jurisdiction.
[44]

 UOB admitted that it raised the exception to the doctrine in its Motion
 for Reconsideration filed before the Court of Appeals after the court 
had already ruled on the propriety of UOB's appeal.
[45]
I
 concur with the ponencia when it held that an exception to the doctrine
 of administrative remedies exists in this case, specifically that the 
main issue involves a legal question that only the courts may address.
[46]
 This opinion shall focus on the legality of the nullification of the entire mortgage over the condominium project.
Presidential Decree No. 957 stands as legislation that promotes the enforcement of social justice.
[47]

 It occupies a unique place in this jurisdiction wherein economic 
considerations are trumped by the need to protect unit or lot buyers 
with the view of ensuring improvement in the quality of life of 
Filipinos.
[48]
Section 18 of this law provides:
SECTION 18. Mortgages. - 
No mortgage on any unit or lot shall be made by the owner or developer without prior written approval of the Authority
.
 Such approval shall not. be granted unless it is shown that the 
proceeds of the mortgage loan shall be used for the development of the 
condominium or subdivision project and effective measures have been 
provided to ensure such utilization. The loan value of each lot or unit 
covered by the mortgage shall be determined and the buyer thereof, if 
any, shall be notified before the release of the loan. The buyer may, at
 his option, pay his installment for the lot or unit directly to the 
mortgagee who shall apply the payments to the corresponding mortgage 
indebtedness secured by the particular lot or unit being paid for, with a
 view to enabling said buyer to obtain title over the lot or unit 
promptly after full payment thereto;
With Section 18 of Presidential Decree No. 957 being a prohibitory law,
[49]
 acts done contrary to its provisions are invalid.
[50]
I
 concur with the ponencia when it held that the lack of mortgage 
clearance from the HLURB in this case resulted in the nullity of the 
mortgage under Section 18 of Presidential Decree No. 957.
[51]
However,
 I disagree with the conclusion that the HLURB erred in declaring the 
entire mortgage void. In refusing to declare the entire mortgage void, 
the ponencia cites 
Far East Bank & Trust Co. v. Marquez
,
[52]
 which was reiterated in 
Philippine National Bank v. Lim
.
[53]
It
 is true that Far East Bank ruled that the HLURB went overboard in 
declaring the mortgage over the entire land void. The court reasoned 
that respondent-buyer had "no personality standing to bring suit on the 
whole property, as he has actionable interest over the subject lot 
only."
[54]
 Similarly, 
Philippine National Bank
 had language which states that:
[W]hile
 it is within Lim's right to file a complaint before the HLURB to 
protect her right as a condominium unit buyer, she has no standing to 
seek for the complete nullification of the subject mortgage. She has an 
actionable interest only over Unit 48C of Cluster Dominiko of Vista de 
Loro, no more and no less.
[55]
Philippine National Bank
,
 however, involved a peculiar set of facts. It involved the application 
of res judicata wherein this court previously upheld the trial court's 
decision that the mortgage contract over the subject properties was 
merely voidable and not void. Thus, the mortgage was held valid between 
the developer and the bank.
[56]
The principal obligation, 
i.e.
,
 the loan contract of JOS, is different from the mortgage constituted 
over the lots and its improvements. The loan obligation, in turn, is 
separate from the developer's obligation to deliver the property to the 
buyers.
The divisibility of the principal obligation is, thus, distinct from the indivisibility of the mortgage.
[57]
 The mortgage contract cannot be divided among the different lots or units.
[58]

 To rule that the nullity of the mortgage contract under Section 18 of 
Presidential Decree No. 957 only applies to the property of the lot or 
unit owner bringing the case implies that the mortgage is divisible 
among the properties it covers.
Article 2089 of the Civil Code provides:
Art.
 2089. A pledge or mortgage is indivisible, even though the debt may be 
divided among the successors in interest of the debtor or of the 
creditor.
In 
Metropolitan Bank and Trust Company, Inc. v. SLGT Holdings, Inc.
,
[59]

 this court definitively ruled on the issue of the nullity of the entire
 mortgage contract under Section 18 of Presidential Decree No. 957. 
Thus:
This disposition stems from the basic postulate that a mortgage contract is, by nature, indivisible
.
 Consequent to this feature, a debtor cannot ask for the release of any 
portion of the mortgaged property or of one or some of the several 
properties mortgaged unless and until the loan thus secured has been 
fully paid, notwithstanding the fact that there has been partial 
fulfillment of the obligation. Hence, it is provided that the debtor who
 has paid a part of the debt cannot ask for the proportionate 
extinguishments of the mortgage as long as the debt is not completely 
satisfied.
The situation obtaining in the case at bench is within
 the purview of the aforesaid rule on the indivisibility of mortgage. It
 may be that Section 18 of PD 957 allows partial redemption of the 
mortgage in the sense that the buyer is entitled to pay his installment 
for the lot or unit directly to the mortgagee so as to enable him - the 
said buyer - to obtain title over the lot or unit after full payment 
thereof. 
Such accommodation statutorily given to a unit/lot buyer 
does not, however, render the mortgage contract also divisible. 
Generally, the divisibility of the principal obligation is not affected 
by the indivisibility of the mortgage. The real estate mortgage 
voluntarily constituted by the debtor (ASB) on the lots or units is one 
and indivisible
. In this case, the mortgage contract executed 
between ASB and the petitioner banks is considered indivisible, that is,
 it cannot be divided among the different buildings or units of the 
Project. Necessarily, partial extinguishment of the mortgage cannot be 
allowed. 
In the same token, the annulment of the mortgage is an all 
or nothing proposition. It cannot be divided into valid, or invalid 
parts. The mortgage is either valid in its entirety or not valid at all
.
 In the present case, there is doubtless only one mortgage to speak of. 
Ergo, a declaration of nullity for violation of Section 18 of PD 957 
should result to the mortgage being nullified wholly.
[60]
 (Emphasis supplied)
In 
Luzon Development Bank v. Enriquez
,
[61]
 this court again nullified the entire mortgage, constituted over several parcels of land, notwithstanding the 
dacion en pago

 executed between the developer and petitioner bank. Among the 
properties included as security for the developer's loan was 
respondent's Lot 4. The court upheld the law's intent to protect 
subdivision lot or condominium unit buyers above everything else.
[62]
 The nullity was in accordance with Section 18 of Presidential Decree No. 957 and was unqualified as to extent of the nullity.
[63]
 Citing 
Metropolitan Bank and Trust Company, Inc.
:
As the HLURB Arbiter and Board of Commissioners both found, 
DELTA
 violated Section 18 of PD 957 in mortgaging the properties in Delta 
Homes I (including Lot 4) to the BANK without prior clearance from the 
HLURB
.
This violation of Section 18 renders the mortgage executed by DELTA void
.
 We have held before that "a mortgage contract executed in breach of 
Section 18 of [PD 957] is null and void." Considering that "PD 957 aims 
to protect innocent subdivision lot and condominium unit buyers against 
fraudulent real estate practices," we have construed Section 18 thereof 
as "prohibitory and acts committed contrary to it are void."
Because
 of the nullity of the mortgage, neither DELTA nor the BANK could assert
 any right arising therefrom. The BANK'S loan of P8 million to DELTA has
 effectively become unsecured due to the nullity of the mortgage. . . . 
[64]
 (Emphasis supplied, citations omitted)
To
 construe Section 18 of Presidential Decree No. 957 to mean that only 
those buyers or owners who brought a claim against the developer and 
mortgagee bank should be entitled to the nullity of the mortgage would 
be to undermine the purpose of the law: protection of real estate 
buyers.
[65]
 The declaration of
 nullity of only a part of the mortgage contract furthermore encourages 
litigation and circumvention of the clear provisions of the law.
[66]
The
 interpretation in the ponencia will mean sanctioning partial mortgage 
releases. It will require all buyers of condominium projects to file 
their own cases to nullify a void mortgage over their property and claim
 release of their titles. Innocent lot or unit buyers will be left 
vulnerable to the whims and manipulations of the developer and/or the 
mortgagee.
Another unintended consequence of the majority's 
decision is the weakening of HLURB's regulatory functions. Developers 
will take advantage of the ambiguity that the allowance of partial 
mortgage releases will create.
It is the court's duty to 
interpret the law as intended by the legislature. As stated before, 
"[t]he lofty aspirations of P.D. No. 957 should be read in every 
provision of the statute, in every contract that undermines its objects,
 in every transaction which threatens its fruition."
[67]
 The law is a tool for social justice. Circumvention should not be tolerated.
[68]
The HLURB, therefore, acted within its powers when it nullified the entire mortgage, as well as the foreclosure proceedings.
[69]
 Consequently, the title to EDUPLAN's Unit E, 10
th
 Floor, Aurora Milestone Tower should be issued pursuant to Section 25 of Presidential Decree No. 957.
[70]
ACCORDINGLY
, I vote that the Petition be 
DENIED
.
 The Decision dated February 27, 2006 and Resolution dated March 5, 2008
 of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. SP No. 86401, insofar as it 
dismissed the Petition for Review of the Housing and Land Use Regulatory
 Board Decision dated August 20, 2004, should be 
AFFIRMED
, The 
mortgage constituted over the Aurora Milestone Tower by respondent 
J.O.S. Managing Builders, Inc. with petitioner United Overseas Bank of 
the Philippines, Inc. is void in its entirety.
[1]
 Regulating the Sale of Subdivision Lots and Condominiums, Providing Penalties for Violations Thereof (1976).
[2]
 
Rollo
,
 pp. 59-66. The Decision, promulgated on February 27, 2006, was penned 
by Justice Portia Alino-Hormachuelos and concurred in by Justices 
Amelita G. Tolentino and Vicente S.E. Veloso of the Fourth Division, 
Court of Appeals Manila.
[3]
 
Id
. at 60.
[4]
 
Id
. at 61.
[5]
 
Id
.
[6]
 
Id
.
[7]
 
Id
.
[8]
 
Id
.
[9]
 
Id
.
[10]
 
Id
.
[11]
 
Id
.
[12]
 
Id
. at 62.
[13]
 
Id
.
[14]
 
Id
.
[15]
 
Id
. at 63.
[16]
 
Id
. at 93.
[17]
 
Id
. at 92.
[18]
 
Id
.
[19]
 
Id
. at 92-93.
[20]
 
Id
. at 93.
[21]
 
Id
. at 93.
[22]
 
Id
. at 65.
[23]
 
citing
 Rule XXI, sec. 2 of the 2004 Rules of Procedure of the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board. 
See rollo
, pp. 70-73.
[24]
 
Id
. at 73.
[25]
 
Id
. at 69.
[26]
 
Id
. at 72.
[27]
 
Id
. at 31-57.
[28]
 
Id
. at 94.
[29]
 
Id
. at 133-A. 
[30]
 
Id
. at 160.
[31]
 
Id
. at 37-38.
[32]
 
Id
. at 39-40.
[33]
 
Id
. at 43-45.
[34]
 
Id
. at 43-44.
[35]
 
Id
. at 44.
[36]
 
Id
. at 45-46.
[37]
 
Id
. at 46.
[38]
 
Id
. at 112.
[39]
 
Id
. at 113.
[40]
 
Id
. at 114.
[41]
 
Id
. at 100.
[42]
 
Id
. at 102.
[43]
 
Id
.
[44]
 
See Addition Hills Mandaluyong Civic & Social Organization, Inc. v. Megaworld Properties & Holdings, Inc.
, G.R. No. 175039, April 18, 2012, 670 SCRA 83 [Per 
J
. Leonardo-De Castro, First Division]. 
[45]
 
Rollo
, p. 39.
[46]
 
See Go v. Distinction Properties Development and Construction, Inc.
, G.R. No. 194024, April 25, 2012, 671 SCRA 461, 481 [Per 
J
. Mendoza, Third Division]. 
[47]
 
See Philippine National Bank v. Office of the President
, 322 Phil. 6 (1996) [Per 
J
. Panganiban, Third Division Resolution]. 
See also Philippine Bank of Communications v. Pridisons Realty Corporation
, G.R. No. 155113, January 9, 2013, 688 SCRA 200, 214 [Per 
J
. Brion, Second Division].
[48]
 
See
 1
st
 whereas clause, Pres. Decree No. 957.
[49]
 
Metropolitan Bank and Trust Company, Inc. v. SLGT Holdings, Inc.
, 559 Phil. 914 (2007) [Per J. Garcia, First Division]. 
See The Manila Banking Corporation v. Rabina
, 594 Phil. 422 (2008) [Per 
J
. Carpio Morales, Second Division].
[50]
 
See

 CIVIL CODE - art. 5 - Acts executed against the provisions of mandatory
 or prohibitory laws shall be void, except when the law itself 
authorizes their validity. (4a)
[51]
 
Ponencia
, p. 6.
[52]
 465 Phil. 276 (2004) [Per 
J
. Panganiban, First Division].
[53]
 G.R. No. 171677, January 30, 2013, 689 SCRA 523 [Per 
J
. Reyes, First Division].
[54]
 
Far East Bank & Trust Co. v. Marquez
, 465 Phil. 276 (2004) [Per 
J
. Panganiban, First Division]. 
[55]
 
Philippine National Bank v. Lim
, G.R. No. 171677, January 30, 2013, 689 SCRA 523, 544 [Per 
J
. Reyes, First Division].
[56]
 
Id
. at 540542. 
[57]
 
Gonzales v. Government Service Insurance System
, 194 Phil. 465, 476 (1981) [Per 
J
. Melencio-Herrera, First Division].
[58]
 Id. 
See also Aquino v. Macondray & Co., Inc., et al.
, 97 Phil. 731, 741 (1955) [Per 
J
. Jugo, First Division].
[59]
 559 Phil. 914 (2007) [Per 
J
. Garcia, First Division].
[60]
 
Id
. at 927-928.
[61]
 654 Phil. 315 (2011) [Per 
J
. Del Castillo, First Division].
[62]
 
Id
.
[63]


 Id
. at 331. The specific subject matter of the case pertained to Lot 4 
of the Delta Homes I project. However, the declaration of nullity of the
 real estate mortgage was unqualified.
[64]
 
Id
.
[65]
 
See Philippine National Bank v. Office of the President
, G.R. No. 104528, January 18, 1996, 252 SCRA 5, 10 [Per 
J
. Panganiban, Third Division Resolution].
[66]
 See Go v. Distinction Properties Development and Construction, Inc.
, G.R. No. 194024, April 25, 2012, 671 SCRA 461, 473 [Per 
J
. Mendoza, Third Division], 
citing Luzon Development Bank v. Enriquez
, G.R. Nos. 168646 and 168666, January 12, 2011, 639 SCRA 332, 337-338 [Per 
J
. Del Castillo, First Division].
[67]
 
Luzon Development Bank v. Enrique
, G.R. No. 168646, January 12, 2011, 639 SCRA 332, 337 [Per 
J
. Del Castillo, First Division].
[68]
 
See Philippine Bank of Communications v. Pridisons Realty Corporation
, G.R. No. 155113, January 9, 2013, 688 SCRA 200, 214 [Per 
J
. Brion, Second Division], 
citing Philippine National Bank v. Office of the President
, 322 Phil. 6 (1996) [Per 
J
. Panganiban, Third Division].
[69]
 
See The Manila Banking Corporation v. Rabina
, 594 Phil. 422 (2008) [Per 
J
. Carpio Morales, Second Division], 
citing
 Section 3 of Pres. Decree No. 957 in relation to Section 1 of Pres. Decree No. 1344:
SECTION
 3. National Housing Authority - The National Housing Authority shall 
have exclusive jurisdiction to regulate the real estate trade and 
business in accordance with the provisions of this Decree.
SECTION
 1. In the exercise of its functions to regulate the real estate trade 
and business and in addition to its powers provided for in Presidential 
Decree No. 957, the National Housing Authority shall have exclusive 
jurisdiction to hear and decide cases of the following nature:
A. Unsound real estate business practices;
B.
 Claims involving refund and any other claims filed by subdivision lot 
or condominium unit buyer against the project owner, developer, dealer, 
broker or salesman; and
C. Cases involving specific performance 
of contractual and statutory obligations filed by buyers of subdivision 
lot or condominium unit against the owner, developer, dealer, or 
salesman.
[70]
 SECTION 
25. Issuance of Title. - The owner or developer shall deliver the title 
of the lot or unit to the buyer upon full payment of the lot or unit.
DISSENTING OPINION
 
BRION, 
J
.:
While I see no basis to disagree with the ponencia on the inapplicability of exhaustion of administrative remedies in the present case, I dissent against its far-reaching conclusion to limit the nullity of the mortgage contract to the interest of the complaining buyer. Thus, on the whole, I express this Opinion as a dissenting one instead of a concurrence and a dissent.
Section 18 of P.D. 957
[1]
 provides as follows:
SEC: 18. Mortgages. - No mortgage on any unit or lot shall be made by the owner or developer without prior written approval of the Authority. Such approval shall not be granted unless it is shown that the proceeds of the mortgage loan shall be used for the development of the condominium or subdivision project and effective measures have been provided to ensure such utilization. The loan value of each lot or unit covered by the mortgage shall be determined and the buyer thereof, if any, shall be notified before the release of the loan. The buyer may, at his option, pay his installment for the lot or unit directly to the mortgagee who shall apply the payments to the corresponding mortgage indebtedness secured by the particular lot or unit being paid for, with a view to enabling said buyer to obtain title over the lot or unit promptly after full payment thereof.
Section 18 of the decree directly addresses the problem of fraud committed against buyers when the lots they have contracted to purchase, and which they have religiously paid for, are mortgaged without their knowledge.
The avowed purpose of P.D. 957 compels the reading of Section 18 to be prohibitory so that 
acts committed contrary to it are void
.
[2]
 This construction ensures the attainment of the purpose of the law: to protect lot buyers so they do not end up homeless despite full payment of the home lots they bought with their hard-earned cash.
[3]
 We fully recognized this intent when we held in 
Philippine National Bank v. Office of the President
 that:
[4]
xxx
 [T]he unmistakable intent of the law [is] to protect innocent lot buyers from scheming subdivision developers. As between these small lot buyers and the gigantic financial institutions which the developers deal with, it is obvious that the law - as an instrument of social justice - must favor the weak. Indeed, the petitioner bank had at its disposal vast resources with which it could adequately protect its loan activities, and therefore is presumed to have conducted the usual "due diligence" checking and ascertaining xxx the actual status, condition, utilization and occupancy of the property offered as collateral, xxx On the other hand, private respondents obviously were powerless to discover the attempt of the land developer to hypothecate the property being sold to them. It was precisely in order to deal with this kind of situation that P.D. 957 was enacted, its very essence and intendment being to provide a protective mantle over helpless citizens who may fall prey to the razzmatazz of what P.D. 957 termed "unscrupulous subdivision and condominium sellers.
Despite the clear and unambiguous provisions of P.D. 957 that clearly reflect this intent, the 
ponencia
 now still hesitates to nullify the entire mortgage contract between United Overseas Bank (
UOB
) and JOS Management Builders Inc. (
JOS
), and opts instead for a tempered approach that only declares a partial invalidity of the mortgage contract; it does so by relying on our ruling in the case of 
Far East Bank v. Marquez
.
[5]
In this cited case, this Court - speaking through then Associate Justice Artemio Panganiban - held that the 
subject of this litigation is limited only to the lot that the respondent bought
;
[6]
 
he has no personality or standing to bring suit on the whole property, as his actionable interest is only over the subject lot
[7]
 This kind of ruling, of course, is 
the unscrupulous subdivision developer's dream
 as he thereby divides the opposition to his fraudulent scheme into individual lot owners, many of whom can ill-afford to devote time and resources to the formal assertion of their rights.
While this Court was briefly enlightened in the subsequent case of 
Metropolitan Bank and Trust Company, Inc. v. SLGT Holding, Inc.
,
[8]
 the present case now resurrects the 
Marquez
 reasoning and thereby allows the watering down of what Section 18, P.D. 957 forcefully commands. It is in the spirit of preventing this retrogressive consequence that I now submit this Dissenting Opinion.
I outline below the reasons supporting my view.
First
, the action in the present case 
assails the validity of the entire mortgage contract
 between UOB and JOS, not solely the validity of the contract to sell between JOS and EDUPLAN Inc. (
EDUPLAN
). While the contract to sell between JOS and EDUPLAN gave the latter the legal right to assail the validity of the real estate mortgage, that right is by no means limited to its 
juridical effect
 on EDUPLAN.
In other words, the principal issue pertains to the validity of the mortgage contract, not simply on its effect on EDUPLAN as a buyer. The juridical effect on EDUPLAN only gives rise to the right to assail the validity of the contract as a whole.
 As aptly stated by the eminent Civil Code Commentator, Senator Arturo Tolentino:
[9]
xxx any person may invoke 
the inexistence of the contract
 whenever its 
juridical effects founded
 thereon are asserted against him.
 Thus, if there has been a void transfer of property, the transferor can recover it by 
accion reinvidicatoria
, and any possessor may refuse to deliver it to the transferee who cannot enforce the transfer. Creditors may attach a property of the debtor, which has been alienated by the latter under a void contract; a debtor can assert the nullity of an assignment of credit as a defense to an action by the assignee, xxx
The 
ponencia
 tried to wiggle out of this tight spot by stating that EDUPLAN has 
actionable interest solely on the unit it bought
. The 
ponencia
's reasoning, however, is badly flawed 
for although the juridical effect of the void mortgage contract condominium buyer is grounded on his purchased unit, it necessarily extends to the completion of the entire project itself
.
Section 2 of Republic Act 4726, otherwise known as the "Condominium Act" provides:
Sec. 2. 
A condominium is an interest in real property consisting of separate interest in a unit in a residential, industrial or commercial building and an undivided interest in common, 
directly or indirectly, in the land on which it is located and in other common areas of the building
.
 A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. Title to the common areas, including the land, or the appurtenant interests in such areas, may be held by a corporation specially formed for the purpose (hereinafter known as the "condominium corporation") in which the holders of separate interest shall automatically be members or shareholders, to the exclusion of others, in proportion to the appurtenant interest of their respective units in the common areas, x x x
While a buyer purchases a unit in a condominium project for independent use or ownership,
[10]
 his 
interests thereon
 are not limited to that livable space 
but 
extends to the entire project itself
. These include the facilities, improvements, infrastructures, and other forms of development, such as water supply and lighting facilities offered and indicated in the condominium plan, brochure, prospectus, or in any form of advertisement
.
[11]
 All these facilities and conveniences materially affect the buyer's investment and the level of use and enjoyment of his unit.
So important is the interest of a condominium buyer to the completion of the project that public policy as enshrined in P.D. 957 jealously protects it in its scattered provisions. In particular, P.D. 957 instructs the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (
HLURB
) to ensure the financial viability of the owner of the lot intended to be converted into a subdivision.
x x x                    x x x                    x x x
The owner or the real estate dealer interested in the sale of lots or units, respectively, in such subdivision project or condominium project shall register the project with the Authority by filing therewith a sworn registration statement containing the following information
x x x                    x x x                    x x x
(e) 
A statement of the capitalization of the owner, including the authorized and outstanding amounts of its capital stock and the proportion thereof which is paid up.
xxx
The following documents shall be attached to the registration statement:
x x x                    x x x                    x x x
(c) 
In case of a business firm, a balance sheet showing the amount and general character of its assets and liabilities and a copy of its articles of incorporation or articles of partnership or association, as the case may be, with all the amendments thereof and existing bylaws or instruments corresponding thereto.
x x x                    x x x                    x x x
Section 5.
 
License to sell
. Such owner or dealer to whom has been issued a registration certificate shall not, however, be authorized to sell any subdivision lot or condominium unit in the registered project unless he shall have first obtained a license to sell the project within two weeks from the registration of such project.
The Authority, upon proper application therefor, shall issue to such owner or dealer of a registered project a license to sell the project if, after an examination of the registration statement filed by said owner or dealer and all the pertinent documents attached thereto, he is convinced that the owner or dealer is of good repute, that his business is financially stable, and that the proposed sale of the subdivision lots or condominium units to the public would not be fraudulent.
Section 6.
 
Performance Bond
. 
No license to sell subdivision lots or condominium units shall be issued by the Authority under Section 5 of this Decree unless the owner or dealer shall have filed an adequate performance bond approved by said Authority to guarantee the construction and maintenance of the roads, gutters, drainage, sewerage, water system, lighting systems, and full development of the subdivision project or the condominium project and the compliance by the owner or dealer with the applicable laws and rules and regulations.
The performance bond shall be executed in favor of the Republic of the Philippines and shall authorize the Authority to use the proceeds thereof for the purposes of its undertaking in case of forfeiture as provided in this Decree.
Similarly, Section 18 of P.D. 957 provides for the regulatory mechanisms precisely to minimize the risk of noncompletion of the project and to protect the buyer's interest. 
In particular, it states that no mortgage on any unit or lot shall be made by the owner or developer without prior written approval of the HLURB. 
Such approval shall not be granted unless it is shown that the proceeds of the mortgage loan shall be used for the development of the condominium or subdivision project and effective measures have been provided to ensure such utilization
.
The loan thus, is primarily intended to be a 
capital infusion
 to complete the project and not simply as a respirator to a barely breathing developer, who or which does not possess the financial means and adequate level of liquidity, and which only relies on leveraging its capital asset and revenues from pre-selling to sustain the project.
The reason for this is that the last thing the State wants is an unfinished condominium project which has surreptitiously been foreclosed by a financial institution. At that point, the buyer practically is left with no recourse but to sue a defaulting developer for refund to recover his meager life savings while the mortgagee bank could sleep at night in view of its secured credit. This Court precisely observed this scheme in 
Metropolitan Bank and Trust Company, Inc. v. SLGT Holding, Inc.
,
[12]
 where we stated:
It happened before; it will likely happen again. A developer embarks on an aggressive marketing campaign and succeeds in selling units in a yet to-be completed condominium project. Short of funds, the developer borrows money from a bank and, without apprising the latter of the pre-selling transactions, mortgages the condominium complex, but also without informing the buyers of the mortgage constitution. Saddled with debts, the developer fails to meet its part of the bargain. The defaulting developer is soon sued by the fully paid unit buyers for specific performance or refund and is threatened at the same time with a foreclosure of mortgage. Having his hands full parrying legal blows from different directions, the developer seeks a declaration of suspension of payment, followed by a petition for rehabilitation with suspension of action.
Second
, it would have been different if EDUPLAN had opted for 
a partial release
 of the mortgage, instead of seeking a declaration of its nullity. 
Such partial release, however, could have only been resorted to if the real estate mortgage is valid, that is, obtained with the prior approval of the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board under Section 18 of P.D. 957.
[13]
 In the absence of an HLURB approval, as in the present case, a partial release of mortgage may not be availed of.
Mr. Justice Bersamin, in his concurring opinion, lamentably, supports the ponencia's reasoning and even attempts to strengthen the arguments by generously citing 
Belo v. Philippine National Bank
.
[14]
In citing 
Belo
,
[15]
 Mr. Justice Bersamin sought to impress upon this Court that the mortgage between JOS and UOB is divisible considering that the principle of indivisibility of mortgages only applies to debtor-creditor relations. To further support his contention, Justice Bersamin cites the last sentence of Section 18 of P.D. 957 which provides that 
the buyer may, at his option, pay his installment for the lot or unit directly to the mortgagee who shall apply the payments to the corresponding mortgage indebtedness secured by the particular lot or unit being paid for, with a view to enabling said buyer to obtain title over the lot or unit promptly after full payment thereof
.
Unfortunately, in his earnestness to support the 
ponencia
, Justice Bersamin glossed over the critical fact that 
Belo
 was decided on a valid mortgage contract
. In particular, in 
Belo
,
[16]
 this Court upheld the partial redemption by the owner of the lot on a 
validly constituted mortgage
. Justice Bersamin therefore suffered the critical error of putting the cart before the horse and effectively assumed the divisibility of mortgage and the remedy of partial release, to argue the validity of the mortgage itself. What he fatally overlooked, however, is that these remedies are only available when the mortgage is validly constituted.
Notably, this principle of partial release is likewise echoed in Section 18 of P.D. 957 which allows the buyer to 
pay his installment for the unit directly to the mortgagee
 who shall apply the payments to the corresponding mortgage indebtedness secured by the particular lot or unit being paid for, with a view to enabling said buyer to obtain the title over the lot for 
validly constituted mortgages. This, however, mandates that the parties to the mortgage secure the 
prior
 clearance from the HLURB before the constitution of mortgage. In the absence of this mandatory provision of law, the remedies provided by divisibility and release are not available
.
Third
, as a 
void contract
, the mortgage in favor of the UOB 
has no legal force and effect from the very beginning; it is equivalent to a contract that has never been entered into and that cannot be validated by time nor by ratification
.
[17]
 The contract 
produces no effect whatsoever either against or in favor of anyone
; hence it does not create, modify or extinguish the juridical relation to which it refers
.
[18]
 The nullity exists 
ipso jure
, and judgment of nullity would be merely declaratory.
[19]
In declaring a partial invalidity of the mortgage contract, the 
ponencia
 practically "gave effect" to a patently void agreement with respect to buyers who fail to seek legal intervention to assail the validity of the real estate mortgage. 
This kind of declaration goes against the concept of void agreements that, by law and by its nature, should produce no civil effects.
[20]
 This is the same principle that is taught to students in law schools as a 
basic characteristic of void contracts
. This cannot be overemphasized in void contracts which violate an overriding public policy, such as in the present case, for to do so would interfere with an established interest of society and injure public interest.
Moreover, the partial invalidity of mortgage goes against established principles of justice and equity, and circumvents the very purpose of P.D. 957. The 
whereas
 clauses of P.D. 957 expressly state that:
WHEREAS, reports of alarming magnitude also show cases of swindling and 
fraudulent manipulations perpetrated by unscrupulous subdivision and condominium sellers and operators, such as failure to deliver titles to the buyers
 or titles free from liens and encumbrances, and to pay real estate taxes, and fraudulent sales of the same subdivision lots to different innocent purchasers for value;
WHEREAS, these acts not only undermine the land and housing program of the government but also defeat the objectives of the New Society, particularly the promotion of peace and order and the enhancement of the economic, social and moral condition of the Filipino people;
[21]
Fourth
, the ponencia 's reliance on the 
doctrine of in 
pari delicto
 in justifying the partial invalidity of the mortgage is 
fatally flawed
. The phrase means, in essence, that since both parties are equally at fault, the court will not involve itself in resolving one side's claim over the other, and whoever possesses whatever is in dispute may continue to do so in the absence of a superior claim.
[22]
 Nonetheless, the application of the doctrine of 
in pari delicto
 is not always rigid. 
An accepted exception arises when its application contravenes well-established public policy.
[23]
 As we held in 
Prudential Bank v. Panis
.
[24]
Nonetheless, we apply our earlier rulings because we believe that as in 
pari delicto
 may not be 
invoked to defeat the policy of the State
 neither may the doctrine of estoppel give a validating effect to a void contract. Indeed, it is generally considered that as between parties to a contract, validity cannot be given to it by estoppel if it is prohibited by law or is against public policy. 
It is not within the competence of any citizen to barter away what public policy by law was to preserve.
[25]
The application of the principle of 
in pari delicto
 to the present case is fraught with danger. To validate the present transaction on the basis of 
in pari delicto
 would open the flood gates to fraud, and much worse, conspiracy, perpetuated by unscrupulous developers and financial institutions at the expense of condominium buyers. An unscrupulous condominium developer without any substantial financial capacity to complete a project could obtain a developer's loan from any financial institution by mortgaging certain parcels of land, emboldened by the knowledge that the courts would leave them where they are until each of the condominium buyers initiate an action to question the nullity of the mortgage. From a business standpoint, said practice is worth the risk for the labyrinth of legalities often serve as a protective mantle for unsound business practices.
Translated to its 
practical effects
, the result will prejudice buyers who do not have the resources to engage their own counsel to defend their rights; at the very least, it will prejudice them to the extent of the time, money, efforts, and resources they will use to protect their rights to the lots or units they have already paid for.
Fifth
, the intent of P.D. 957 is to 
protect buyers
 from fraudulent manipulations perpetrated by unscrupulous subdivision and condominium sellers and operators, and 
not large scale mortgages
. In construing P.D. 957, 
this Court must recognize this legislative policy to the fullest extent
. Already, this Court has adopted and articulated its full recognition and support for this intent in 
Philippine National Bank v. Office of the President
 when it said:
[26]
Protection must be afforded small homeowners who toil and save if only to purchase on installment a tiny home lot they can call their own. The consuming dream of every Filipino is to be able to buy a lot, no matter how small, so that he may somehow build a house. It has, however, been seen of late that these honest, hard-living individuals are taken advantage of, with the delivery of titles delayed, the subdivision facilities, including the most essential such as water installations not completed, or worse yet, as in the instant case, after almost completing the payments for the property and after constructing a house, the buyer is suddenly confronted by the stark reality, contrived or otherwise, in which another person would now appear to be owner.
Let us not now return to this ruling and definitively reject other rulings that reject the salutary purposes of P.D. 957.
In these lights, I vote to 
DENY
 the petition.
[1]
 REGULATING THE SALE OF SUBDIVISION LOTS AND CONDOMINIUMS, PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF.
[2]
 
Far East Bank & Trust Co. v. Marquez
, G.R. No. 147964, January 20, 2004, 420 SCRA 349.
[3]
 
Id
.
[4]
 G.R. No. 104528, January 18, 1996, 252 SCRA 5. 
[5]
 
Supra
 note 2. 
[6]
 
Id
.
[7]
 
Id
.
[8]
 G.R. Nos. 175181-82, September 14, 2007, 533 SCRA 516.
[9]
 Tolentino, 
Commentaries on Jurisprudence on Civil Code of the Philippines
, Vol. V., 1986 Ed at p. 632.
[10]
 P.D. 957, Section 2 (b) "Unit" means a part of the condominium project intended for any type of independent use or ownership, including one or more rooms or spaces located in one or more floors (or part or parts of floors) in a building or buildings and such accessories as may be appended thereto.
[11]
 Section 19, P.D. 957.
[12]
 
Supra
 note 8.
[13]
 SEC. 18. Mortgages. - No mortgage on any unit or lot shall be made by the owner or developer without prior written approval of the Authority. Such approval shall not be granted unless it is shown that the proceeds of the mortgage loan shall be used for the development of the condominium or subdivision project and effective measures have been provided to ensure such utilization. The loan value of each lot or unit covered by the mortgage shall be determined and the buyer thereof, if any, shall be notified before the release of the loan. The buyer may, at his option, pay his installment for the lot or unit directly to the mortgagee who shall apply the payments to the corresponding mortgage indebtedness secured by the particular lot or unit being paid for, with a view to enabling said buyer to obtain title over the lot or unit promptly after full payment thereof. See also Section 4 par 4(d), (Id.) which states that 
in case any subdivision lot or condominium unit is mortgaged, it is sufficient if the instrument of mortgage contains a stipulation that the mortgagee shall release the mortgage on any subdivision lot or condominium unit as soon as the full purchase price for the same is paid by the buyer
. [Emphasis supplied]
[14]
 G.R. No. 134330, March 1, 2001, 353 SCRA 359.
[15]
 
Id
.
[16]
 
Id
.
[17]
 
Supra
 note 9.
[18]
 
Id
.
[19]
 
Id
.
[20]
 
Id
. at 629.
[21]
 Emphasis supplied.
[22]
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In_pari_delicto
.
[23]
 
Gonzalo v. Tarnate
, G.R. No. 160600, January 15, 2014.
[24]
 G.R. No. L-50008, August 31, 1987, 153 SCRA 390. 
[25]
 Citations omitted.
[26]
 
Supra
 note 4.




 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)