E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			862 Phil. 120
			




EN BANC


[ G.R. No. 230642, September 10, 2019 ]


OSCAR B. PIMENTEL, ERROL B. COMAFAY, JR., RENE B. GOROSPE, EDWIN R. SANDOVAL, VICTORIA B. LOANZON, ELGIN MICHAEL C. PEREZ, ARNOLD E. CACHO, AL CONRAD B. ESPALDON, ED VINCENT S. ALBANO, LEIGHTON R. SIAZON, ARIANNE C. ARTUGUE, CLARABEL ANNE R. LACSINA, KRISTINE JANE R. LIU, ALYANNA MARL C. BUENVIAJE, IANA PATRICIA DULA T. NICOLAS, IRENE A. TOLENTINO AND AUREA I. GRUYAL, PETITIONERS, VS. LEGAL EDUCATION BOARD, AS REPRESENTED BY ITS CHAIRPERSON, HON. EMERSON B. AQUENDE, AND LEB MEMBER HON. ZENAIDA N. ELEPAÃ‘O, RESPONDENTS;
 ATTYS. ANTHONY D. BENGZON, FERDINAND M. NEGRE, MICHAEL Z. UNTALAN; JONATHAN Q. PEREZ, SAMANTHA WESLEY K. ROSALES, ERIKA M. ALFONSO, KRYS VALEN O. MARTINEZ, RYAN CEAZAR P. ROMANO, AND KENNETH C. VARONA, RESPONDENTS-IN-INTERVENTION;
APRIL D. CABALLERO, JEREY C. CASTARDO, MC WELLROE P. BRINGAS, RHUFFY D. FEDERE, CONRAD THEODORE A. MATUTINO AND NUMEROUS OTHERS SIMILARLY SITUATED, ST. THOMAS MORE SCHOOL OF LAW AND BUSINESS, INC., REPRESENTED BY ITS PRESIDENT RODOLFO C. RAPISTA, FOR HIMSELF AND AS FOUNDER, DEAN AND PROFESSOR, OF THE COLLEGE OF LAW, JUDY MARIE RAPISTA-TAN, LYNNART WALFORD A. TAN, IAN M. ENTERINA, NEIL JOHN VILLARICO AS LAW PROFESSORS AND AS CONCERNED CITIZENS, PETITIONERS-INTERVENORS;
[G.R. No. 242954]
 FRANCIS JOSE LEAN L. ABAYATA,GRETCHEN M. VASQUEZ, SHEENAH S. ILUSTRISMO, RALPH LOUIE SALAÃ‘O, AIREEN MONICA B. GUZMAN, DELFINO ODIAS, DARYL DELA CRUZ, CLAIRE SUICO, AIVIE S. PESCADERO, NIÃ‘A CHRISTINE DELA PAZ, SHEMARK K. QUENIAHAN, AL JAY T. MEJOS, ROCELLYN L. DAÃ‘O,
*
 MICHAEL ADOLFO, RONALD A. ATIG, LYNNETTE C. LUMAYAG, MARY CHRIS LAGERA, TIMOTHY B. FRANCISCO, SHEILA MARIE C. DANDAN, MADELINE C. DELA PEÃ‘A, DARLIN R. VILLAMOR, LORENZANA L. LLORICO, AND JAN IVAN M. SANTAMARIA, PETITIONERS, VS. HON. SALVADOR MEDIALDEA, EXECUTIVE SECRETARY, AND LEGAL EDUCATION BOARD, HEREIN REPRESENTED BY ITS CHAIRPERSON, EMERSON B. AQUENDE, RESPONDENTS.
DECISION




REYES, J. JR., J.:


On the principal grounds of encroachment upon the rule-making power of the Court concerning the practice of law, violation of institutional academic freedom and violation of a law school aspirant's right to education, these consolidated Petitions for Prohibition (G.R. No. 230642) and 
Certiorari
 and Prohibition (G.R. No. 242954) under Rule 65 of the Rules of Court assail as unconstitutional Republic Act (R.A.) No. 7662,
[1]
 or the Legal Education Reform Act of 1993, which created the Legal Education Board (LEB). On the same principal grounds, these petitions also particularly seek to declare as unconstitutional the LEB issuances establishing and implementing the nationwide law school aptitude test known as the Philippine Law School Admission Test or the PhiLSAT.
The Antecedents
Prompted by clamors for the improvement of the system of legal education on account of the poor performance of law students and law schools in the bar examinations,
[2]
 the Congress, on December 23, 1993, passed into law R.A. No. 7662 with the following policy statement:
SEC. 2. 
Declaration of Policies
. - It is hereby declared the policy of the State to uplift the standards of legal education in order to prepare law students for advocacy, counselling, problem-solving, and decision-making, to infuse in them the ethics of the legal profession; to impress on them the importance, nobility and dignity of the legal profession as an equal and indispensable partner of the Bench in the administration of justice and to develop social competence.
Towards this end, the State shall undertake appropriate reforms in the legal education system, require proper selection of law students, maintain quality among law schools, and require legal apprenticeship and continuing legal education.
R.A. No. 7662 identifies the general and specific objectives of legal education in this manner:
SEC. 3. General and Specific Objective of Legal Education. -
(a) Legal education in the Philippines is geared to attain the following objectives:
(1)
 
to prepare students for the practice of law;
(2) 
to increase awareness among members of the legal profession of the needs of the poor, deprived and oppressed sectors of society;
(3) 
to train persons for leadership;
(4) 
to contribute towards the promotion and advancement of justice and the improvement of its administration, the legal system and legal institutions in the light of the historical and contemporary development of law in the Philippines and in other countries.
(b) Legal education shall aim to accomplish the following specific objectives:
(1) 
to impart among law students a broad knowledge of law and its various fields and of legal institutions;
(2) 
to enhance their legal research abilities to enable them to analyze, articulate and apply the law effectively, as well as to allow them to have a holistic approach to legal problems and Issues;
(3)
 to prepare law students for advocacy, [counseling], problemÂ­-solving and decision-making, and to develop their ability to deal with recognized legal problems of the present and the future;
(4)
 to develop competence in any field of law as is necessary for gainful employment or sufficient as a foundation for future training beyond the basic professional degree, and to develop in them the desire and capacity for continuing study and selfÂ­ improvement;
(5) 
to inculcate in them the ethics and responsibilities of the legal profession; and
(6) 
to produce lawyers who conscientiously pursue the lofty goals of their profession and to fully adhere to its ethical norms.
For these purposes, R.A. No. 7662 created the LEB, an executive agency which was made separate from the Department of Education, Culture and Sports (DECS), but attached thereto solely for budgetary purposes and administrative support.
[3]
 The Chairman and regular members of the LEB are to be appointed by the President for a term of five years, without reappointment, from a list of at least three nominees prepared, with prior authorization from the Court, by the Judicial and Bar Council (JBC).
[4]
Section 7 of R.A. No. 7662 enumerates the powers and functions of the LEB as follows:
SEC. 7. 
Powers and Functions
. - For the purpose of achieving the objectives of this Act, the Board shall have the following powers and functions:
(a) to administer the legal education system in the country in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Act;
(b) to supervise the law schools in the country, consistent with its powers and functions as herein enumerated;
(c) to set the standards of accreditation for law schools taking into account, among others, the size of enrollment, the qualifications of the members of the faculty, the library and other facilities, without encroaching upon the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning;
(d) to accredit law schools that meet the standards of accreditation;
(e) to prescribe minimum standards for law admission and minimum qualifications and compensation to faculty members;
(f) to prescribe the basic curricula for the course of study aligned to the requirements for admission to the Bar, law practice and social consciousness, and such other courses of study as may be prescribed by the law schools and colleges under the different levels of accreditation status;
(g) to establish a law practice internship as a requirement for taking the Bar which a law student shall undergo with any duly accredited private or public law office or firm or legal assistance group anytime during the law course for a specific period that the Board may decide, but not to exceed a total of twelve (12) months. For this purpose, the Board shall prescribe the necessary guidelines for such accreditation and the specifications of such internship which shall include the actual work of a new member of the Bar[;]
(h) to adopt a system of continuing legal education. For this purpose, the Board may provide for the mandatory attendance of practicing lawyers in such courses and for such duration as the Board may deem necessary; and
(i) to perform such other functions and prescribe such rules and regulations necessary for the attainment of the policies and objectives of this Act.
On the matter of accreditation of law schools, R.A. No. 7662 further elaborates:
SEC. 8. 
Accreditation of Law Schools
. - Educational institutions may not operate a law school unless accredited by the Board. Accreditation of law schools may be granted only to educational institutions recognized by the Government.
SEC. 9. 
Withdrawal or Downgrading of Accreditation
. - The [LEB] may withdraw or downgrade the accreditation status of a law school if it fails to maintain the standards set for its accreditation status.
SEC. 10. 
Effectivity of Withdrawal or Downgrading of Accreditation
. - The withdrawal or downgrading of accreditation status shall be effective after the lapse of the semester or trimester following the receipt by the school of the notice of withdrawal or downgrading unless, in the meantime, the school meets and/or upgrades the standards or corrects the deficiencies upon which the withdrawal or downgrading of the accreditation status is based.
Bar Matter No. 979-B
Re: Legal Education
In July 2001, the Court's Committee on Legal Education and Bar Matters (CLEBM), through its Chairperson, Justice Jose C. Vitug, noted several objectionable provisions of R.A. No. 7662 which "go beyond the ambit of education of aspiring lawyers and into the sphere of education of persons duly licensed to practice the law profession."
[5]
In particular, the CLEBM observed:
x x x [U]nder the declaration of policies in Section 2 of [R.A. No. 7662], the State "shall x x x require apprenticeship and continuing legal education." The concept of continuing legal education encompasses education not only of law students but also of members of the legal profession. [This] implies that the [LEB] shall have jurisdiction over the education of persons who have finished the law course and are already licensed to practice law[, in violation of the Supreme Court's power over the Integrated Bar of the Philippines].
x x x Section 3 provides as one of the objectives of legal education increasing "awareness among members of the legal profession of the needs of the poor, deprived and oppressed sectors of the society." Such objective should not find a place in the law that primarily aims to upgrade the standard of schools of Â·law as they perform the task of educating aspiring lawyers. Section 5, paragraph 5 of Article VIII of the Constitution also provides that the Supreme Court shall have the power to promulgate rules on "legal assistance to the underprivileged" and hence, implementation of [R.A. No. 7662] might give rise to infringement of a constitutionally mandated power.
x x x [Section 7(e) giving the LEB the power to prescribe minimum standards for law admission and Section 7(h) giving the LEB the power to adopt a system of continuing legal education and for this purpose, the LEB may provide for the mandatory attendance of practicing lawyers in such courses and for such duration as the LEB may deem necessary] encroach upon the Supreme Court's powers under Section 5, paragraph 5 of Article VIII of the Constitution. Aside from its power over the Integrated Bar of the Philippines, the Supreme Court is constitutionally mandated to promulgate rules concerning admission to the practice of law.
[6]
While the CLEBM saw the need for the LEB to oversee the system of legal education, it cautioned that the law's objectionable provisions, for reasons above-cited, must be removed.
[7]
Relative to the foregoing observations, the CLEBM proposed the following amendments to R.A. No. 7662:
SEC. 2. 
Declaration of Policies
. - It is hereby declared the policy of the State to uplift the standards of legal education in order to prepare law students for advocacy, counseling, problem-solving, and decisionÂ­-making; to infuse in them the ethics of the legal profession; to impress upon them the importance, nobility and dignity of the legal profession as an equal and indispensable partner of the Bench in the administration of justice; and, to develop socially-committed lawyers with integrity and competence.
Towards this end, the State shall undertake appropriate reforms in the legal education system, require proper selection of law students, provide for legal apprenticeship, and maintain quality among law schools.
x x x x
SEC. 3. 
General and Specific Objectives of Legal Education
. x x x
x x x x
2.) 
to increase awareness among law students of the needs of the poor, deprived and oppressed sectors of society
;
x x x x
SEC. 7. 
Power and functions
. - x x x
(a) to 
regulate
 the legal education system in accordance with its powers and functions herein enumerated;
(b) to 
establish standards of accreditation for law schools, consistent with academic freedom and pursuant to the declaration of policy set forth in Section 2
 hereof;
(c) to 
accredit law schools that meet the standards of accreditation
; 
(d) to 
prescribe minimum standards for admission to law schools including a system of law aptitude examination
;
(e) to provide for 
minimum qualifications for faculty members of law schools
;
(f) to 
prescribe guidelines for law practice internship which the law schools may establish as part of the curriculum
; and
(g) to perform such 
other administrative functions as may be necessary for the attainment of the policies and objectives of this Act
.
[8]
 (Underscoring supplied)
x x x x
In a Resolution
[9]
 dated September 4, 2001, the Court approved the CLEBM's explanatory note and draft amendments to R.A. No. 7662. The Senate and the House of Representatives were formally furnished with a copy of said Resolution. This, notwithstanding, R.A. No. 7662 remained unaltered.
LEB Issuances
In 2003, the Court issued a resolution authorizing the JBC to commence the nomination process for the members of the LEB. In 2009, the LEB was constituted with the appointment of Retired Court of Appeals Justice Hilarion L. Aquino as the first Chairperson and followed by the appointment of LEB members, namely, Dean Eulogia M. Cueva, Justice Eloy R. Bello, Jr., Dean Venicio S. Flores and Commission on Higher Education (CHED) Director Felizardo Y. Francisco. Despite the passage of the enabling law in 1993, the LEB became fully operational only in June 2010.
Acting pursuant to its authority to prescribe the minimum standards for law schools, the LEB issued 
Memorandum Order No. 1, Series of 2011
 (LEBMO No. 1-2011) providing for the Policies and Standards of Legal Education and Manual of Regulation for Law Schools.
Since then, the LEB had issued several orders, circulars, resolutions, and other issuances which are made available through their website:
A. Orders
Number
Title/Subject
LEBMO No. 2
Additional Rules in the Operation of the Law Program
LEBMO No. 3-2016
Policies, Standards and, Guidelines for the Accreditation of Law Schools to Offer and Operate Refresher Courses
LEBMO No. 4-2016
Supplemental to [LEBMO] No. 3, Series of 2016
LEBMO No. 5-2016
Guidelines for the [Prerequisite] Subjects in the Basic Law Courses
LEBMO No. 6-2016
Reportorial Requirements for Law Schools
LEBMO No. 7-2016
Policies and Regulations for the Administration of a Nationwide Uniform Law School Admission Test for Applicants to the Basic Law Courses in All Law Schools in the Country
LEBMO No. 8-2016
Policies, Guidelines and Procedures Governing Increases in Tuition and Other School Fees, and, Introduction of New Fees by Higher, Education Institutions for the Law Program
LEBMO No. 9-2017
Policies and Guidelines on the Conferment of Honorary Doctor of Laws Degrees
LEBMO No. 10-2017
Guidelines on the Adoption of Academic/School Calendar
LEBMO No. 11-2017
Additional Transition Provisions to [LEBMO] No. 7, Series of 2016, on PhiLSAT
LEBMO No. 12-2018
LEB Service/Transaction Fees
LEBMO No. 13-2018 
Guidelines
  in the Conduct of Summer Classes
LEBMO No. 14-2018
Policy and Regulations in Offering Elective Subjects
LEBMO No. 15-2018
 
Validation of the Licenses of, and the Law Curriculum/Curricula for the Basic Law Courses in use by Law Schools and Graduate Schools of Law
LEBMO No. 16-2018
Policies, Standards and Guidelines for the Academic Law Libraries of Law Schools
LEBMO No. 17-2018 
Supplemental Regulations on the Minimum Academic Requirement of Master of Laws Degree for Deans and Law Professors/Lecturers/Instructors in Law Schools
LEBMO No. 18-2018
Guidelines on Cancellation or Suspension of Classes in All Law Schools
LEBMO No. 19-2018 
Migration of the Basic Law Course to Juris Doctor
LEBMO No. 20-2019
Discretionary Admission in the AY 2019-2020 of Examinees Who Rated Below the Cut-off/Passing Score but Not Less than 45% in the Philippine Law School Admission Test Administered on April 7, 2019
B. Memorandum Circulars
Number
Title/Subject
LEBMC No. 1 
New Regulatory Issuances
LEBMC No. 2
Submission of Schedule of Tuition and Other School Fees
LEBMC No. 3
Submission of Law School Information Report
LEBMC No. 4
Reminder to Submit Duly Accomplished LSIR Form
LEBMC No. 5
Offering of the Refresher Course for AY 2017-2018
LEBMC No. 6
Applications for LEB Certification Numbers
LEBMC No. 7
Application of Transitory Provision Under [LEBMO] No. 7 Series of 2017 and [LEBMO] No. 11, Series of 2017 in the Admission of Freshmen Law Students in Basic Law Courses in Academic Year 2017-2018
LEBMC No. 8
Guidelines for Compliance with the Reportorial Requirements Under [LEBMO] No. 7, Series of 2016 for Purposes of the Academic Year 2017-2018
LEBMC No. 9
Observance of Law Day and Philippine National Law Week
LEBMC No. 10
September 21, 2017 Suspension of Classes
LEBMC No. 11
Law Schools Authorized to Offer the Refresher Course in the Academic Year 2016-2017
LEBMC No. 12
Law Schools Authorized to Offer the Refresher Course in the Academic Year 2017-2018
LEBMC No. 13
Legal Research Seminar of the Philippine Group of Law Librarians on April 4-6, 2018
LEBMC No. 14
CSC Memorandum Circular No. 22, s.2016
LEBMC No. 15
Law Schools Authorized to Offer the Refresher Course in the Academic Year 2018-2019 
LEBMC No. 16
Clarification to [LEBMO] No. 3, Series of 2016
LEBMC No. 17
Updated List of Law Schools Authorized to Offer the Refresher Course in the Academic Year 2018-2019 
LEBMC No. 18
PHILSAT Eligibility Requirement for Freshmen in the Academic Year 2018-2019
LEBMC No. 19
Guidelines for the Limited Conditional Admission/Enrollment in the 1
st
 Semester of the Academic Year 2018-2019 Allowed for Those Who Have Not Taken the PhiLSAT
LEBMC No. 20
Updated List of Law Schools Authorized to Offer the Refresher Course in the Academic Year 2018-2019
LEBMC No. 21
Adjustments/Corrections to the Requirements for Law Schools to be Qualified to Conditionally Admit/Enroll Freshmen Law Students in AY 2018-2019 
LEBMC No. 22
Advisory on who should take the September 23, 2018 PhiLSAT
LEBMC No. 23
Collection of the PhiLSAT Certificate of Eligibility/Exemption by Law Schools from Applicants for Admission
LEBMC No. 24
Observance of the Philippine National Law Week
LEBMC No. 25
Competition Law
LEBMC No. 26
Scholarship Opportunity for Graduate Studies for Law Deans, Faculty Members and Law Graduates with the 2020-2021 Philippine Fulbright Graduate Student Program
LEBMC No. 27
Advisory on April 7, 2019 PhiLSAT and Conditional [Enrollment] for Incoming Freshmen/1
st
 Year Law Students
LEBMC No. 28
April 25-26, 2019 Competition Law Training Program
LEBMC No. 29
Detailed Guidelines for Conditional Enrollment Permit Application
LEBMC No. 30
Law Schools Authorized to Offer Refresher Course in AY 2019-2020
LEBMC No. 31
Law Schools Authorized to Offer Refresher Course in AY 2019-2020
LEBMC No. 40
Reminders concerning Conditionally Enrolled Freshmen Law Students in AY 2019-2020
C. Resolutions and Other Issuances
Number 
Title/Subject
Resolution No. 16
Reportorial Requirement for Law Schools with Small Students Population
Resolution No.7, Series of 2010
Declaring a 3-Year Moratorium in the Opening of New Law Schools
Resolution No. 8, Series of 2010
Administrative Sanctions
Resolution No. 2011-21
A Resolution Providing for Supplementary Rules to the Provisions of LEBMO No. 1 in regard to Curriculum and Degrees Ad Eundem
Resolution No. 2012-02
A Resolution Eliminating the Requirement of Special, Orders for Graduates of the Basic Law Degrees and Graduate Law Degrees and Replacing them with a Per Law School Certification Approved by the Legal Education Board
Resolution No. 2013-01
Ethical Standards of Conduct for Law Professors
Resolution No. 2014-02
Prescribing Rules on the Ll.M. Staggered Compliance Schedule and the Exemption from the Ll.M. Requirement
Resolution No. 2015-08
Prescribing the Policy and Rules in the Establishment of a Legal Aid Clinic in Law Schools
Order
Annual Law Publication Requirements
Chairman Memorandum
Restorative Justice to be Added as Elective Subject
           
The PhiLSAT under LEBMO No. 7-2016, LEBMO No. 11-2017, LEBMC No. 18-2018, and related issuances
 
As above-enumerated, among the orders issued by the LEB was 
Memorandum Order No. 7, Series of 2016
 (LEBMO No. 7-2016) pursuant to its power to "prescribe the minimum standards for law admission" under Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662.
The policy and rationale of LEBMO No. 7-2016 is to improve the quality of legal education by requiring all those seeking admission to the basic law course to take and pass a nationwide uniform law school admission test, known as the PhiLSAT.
[10]
The PhiLSAT is essentially an aptitude test measuring the examinee's communications and language proficiency, critical thinking, verbal and quantitative reasoning.
[11]
 It was designed to measure the academic potential of the examinee to pursue the study of law.
[12]
 Exempted from the PhiLSAT requirement were honor graduates who were granted professional civil service eligibility and who are enrolling within two years from their college graduation.
[13]
Synthesizing, the key provisions of LEBMO No. 7-2016 are as follows:
(1) The policy and rationale of requiring PhiLSAT is to improve the quality of legal education. The PhiLSAT shall be administered under the control and supervision of the LEB;
[14]
(2) The PhiLSAT is an aptitude test that measures the academic potential of the examinee to pursue the study of law;
[15]
(3) A qualified examinee is either a graduate of a four-Â­year bachelor's degree; expecting to graduate with a four-year bachelor's degree at the end of the academic year when the PhiLSAT was administered; or a graduate from foreign higher education institutions with a degree equivalent to a four-year bachelor's degree. There is no limit as to the number of times a qualified examinee may take the PhiLSAT;
[16]
(4) The LEB may designate an independent third-party testing administrator;
[17]
(5) The PhiLSAT shall be administered at least once a year, on or before April 16, in testing centers;
[18]
(6) The testing fee shall not exceed the amount of P1,500.00 per examination;
[19]
(7) The cut-off or passing score shall be 55% correct answers, or such percentile score as may be prescribed by the LEB;
[20]
(8) Those who passed shall be issued a Certificate of Eligibility while those who failed shall be issued a Certificate of Grade;
[21]
(9) Passing the PhiLSAT is required for admission to any law school. No applicant shall be admitted for enrollment as a first year student in the basic law course leading to a degree of either Bachelor of Laws or Juris Doctor unless he has passed the PhiLSAT taken within two years before the start of the study;
[22]
(10) Honor graduates granted professional civil service eligibility who are enrolling within two years from college graduation are exempted from taking and passing the PhiLSAT for purposes of admission to the basic law course;
[23]
(11) Law schools, in the exercise of academic freedom, can prescribe additional requirements for admission;
[24]
(12) Law schools shall submit to LEB reports of first year students admitted and enrolled, and their PhiLSAT scores, as well as the subjects enrolled and the final grades received by every first year student;
[25]
(13) Beginning academic year 2018-2019, the general average requirement (not less than 80% or 2.5) for admission to basic law course under Section 23 of LEBMO No. 1-2011 is removed;
[26]
(14) In academic year 2017-2018, the PhiLSAT passing score shall not be enforced and the law schools shall have the discretion to admit in the basic law course, applicants who scored less than 55% in the PhiLSAT, provided that the law dean shall submit a justification for the admission and the required report;
[27]
 and
(15) Law schools, in violation of LEBMO No. 7-2016, shall be administratively sanctioned as prescribed in Section 32
[28]
 of LEBMO No. 2-2013
[29]
 and/or fined up to P10,000.00.
[30]
Effective for the academic year 2017 to 2018, no applicant to law school was allowed admission without having taken and passed the PhiLSAT. The first PhiLSAT examination was held on April 16, 2017 in seven pilot sites: Baguio City, Metro Manila, Legazpi City, Cebu City, Iloilo City, Davao City, and Cagayan de Oro. A total of 6,575 out of 8,074 examinees passed the first-ever PhiLSAT. For the first PhiLSAT, the passing grade was adjusted by the LEB from 55% to 45% by way of consideration.
Since the PhiLSAT was implemented for the first time and considering further that there were applicants who failed to take the PhiLSAT because of the inclement weather last April 16, 2017, the LEB issued 
Memorandum Order No. 11, Series of 2017
 (LEBMO No. 11-2017).
Under LEBMO No. 11-2017, those who failed to take the first PhiLSAT were allowed to be admitted to law schools for the first semester of academic year 2017 to 2018 for justifiable or meritorious reasons and conditioned under the following terms:
2. Conditions - x x x
a. The student shall take the next scheduled PhiLSAT;
b. If the student fails to take the next scheduled PhiLSAT for any reason, his/her conditional admission in the law school shall be automatically revoked and barred from enrolling in the following semester;
c. If the student takes the next scheduled PhiLSAT but scores below the passing or cut-off score, his/her conditional admission shall also be revoked and barred from enrolling in the following semester, unless the law school expressly admits him/her in the exercise of the discretion given under Section/Paragraph 14 of LEBMO No. 7, Series of 2016, subject to the requirements of the same provision;
d. The student whose conditional admission and enrol[l]ment is subsequently revoked shall not be entitled to the reversal of the school fees assessed and/or refund of the school fees paid; and
e. The student shall execute under oath, and file with his/her application for a Permit for Conditional Admission/Enrol[l]ment, an UNDERTAKING expressly agreeing to the foregoing conditions.
[31]
The conditional admission and enrollment under LEBMO No. 11-2017 and the transitory provision provided in LEBMO No. 7-2016 were subsequently clarified by the LEB through its 
Memorandum Circular No. 7, Series of 2017
 (LEBMC No. 7-2017).
On September 24, 2017 and April 8, 2018, the second and third PhiLSATs were respectively held.
On October 26, 2017, the LEB issued a 
Memorandum
 reminding law schools, law students, and other interested persons that the passing of the PhiLSAT is required to be eligible for admission/enrollment in the basic law course for academic year 2017 to 2018. It was also therein clarified that the discretion given to law schools to admit those who failed the PhiLSAT during the initial year of implementation is only up to the second semester of academic year 2017-2018.
Because of the confusion as to whether conditional admission for academic year 2018 to 2019 may still be allowed, the LEB issued 
Memorandum Circular No. 18, Series of 2018
 (LEBMC No. 18-2018). Under LEBMC No. 18-2018, it was clarified that the conditional admission was permitted only in academic year 2017 to 2018 as part of the transition adjustments in the initial year of the PhiLSAT implementation. As such, by virtue of LEBMC No. 18-2018, the conditional admission of students previously allowed under LEBMO No. 11-2017 was discontinued.
Nevertheless, on July 25, 2018, the LEB issued 
Memorandum Circular No. 19, Series of 2018
 (LEBMC No. 19-2018) allowing limited conditional admission/enrollment in the first semester of academic year 2018 to 2019 for those applicants who have never previously taken the PhiLSAT. Those who have taken the PhiLSAT and scored below the cut-off score were disqualified. In addition, only those law schools with a passing rate of not less than 25%, are updated in the reportorial requirement and signified its intention to conditionally admit applicants were allowed to do so. The limited enrollment was subject to the condition that the admitted student shall take and pass the next PhiLSAT on September 23, 2018, otherwise the conditional enrollment shall be nullified. Non-compliance with said circular was considered a violation of the minimum standards for the law program for which law schools may be administratively penalized.
The fourth PhiLSAT then pushed through on September 23, 2018.
The Petitions
Days before the scheduled conduct of the first-ever PhiLSAT on April 16, 2017, petitioners Oscar B. Pimentel (Pimentel), Errol B. Comafay (Comafay), Rene B. Gorospe (Gorospe), Edwin R. Sandoval (Sandoval), Victoria B. Loanzon (Loanzon), Elgin Michael C. Perez (Perez), Arnold E. Cacho (Cacho), Al Conrad B. Espaldon (Espaldon) and Ed Vincent S. Albano (Albano) [as citizens, lawyers, taxpayers and law professors], with their co-petitioners Leighton R. Siazon (Siazon), Arianne C. Artugue (Artugue), Clarabel Anne R. Lacsina (Lacsina) and Kristine Jane R. Liu (Liu) [as citizens, lawyers and taxpayers], Alyanna Mari C. Buenviaje (Buenviaje) and Iana Patricia Dula T. Nicolas (Nicolas) [as citizens intending to take up law] and Irene A. Tolentino (Tolentino) and Aurea I. Gruyal (Gruyal) [as citizens and taxpayers] filed their Petition for Prohibition,
[32]
 docketed as G.R. No. 230642, principally seeking that R.A. No. 7662 be declared unconstitutional and that the creation of the LEB be invalidated together with all its issuances, most especially the PhiLSAT, for encroaching upon the rule-making power of the Court concerning admissions to the practice of law;
[33]
 They prayed for the issuance of a temporary restraining order (TRO) to prevent the LEB from conducting the PhiLSAT.
Respondents-in-intervention Attys. Anthony D. Bengzon (Bengzon), Ferdinand M. Negre (Negre), Michael Z. Untalan (Untalan), Jonathan Q. Perez (Perez), Samantha Wesley K. Rosales (Rosales), Erika M. Alfonso (Alfonso), Krys Valen O. Martinez (Martinez), Ryan Ceazar P. Romano (Romano), and Kenneth C. Varona (Varona) [as citizens and lawyers] moved to intervene and prayed for the dismissal of the Petition for Prohibition.
[34]
On February 12, 2018, petitioners-in-intervention April D. Caballero (Caballero), Jerey C. Castardo (Castardo), MC Wellroe P. Bringas (Bringas), Rhuffy D. Federe (Federe) and Conrad Theodore A. Matutino (Matutino) [as graduates of four-year college course and applicants as first year law students], St. Thomas More School of Law and Business, Inc., [as an educational stock corporation] and Rodolfo C. Rapista (Rapista), Judy Marie Rapista-Tan (Rapista-Tan), Lynnart Walford A. Tan (Tan), Ian M. Enterina (Enterina) and Neil John Villarico (Villarico) [as citizens and law professors] intervened and joined the Petition for Prohibition of Pimentel, 
et al.
, seeking to declare R.A. No. 7662 and the PhiLSAT as unconstitutional.
[35]
Thereafter, a Petition for 
Certiorari
 and Prohibition, docketed as G.R. No. 242954, was filed by petitioners Francis Jose Lean L. Abayata (Abayata), Gretchen M. Vasquez (Vasquez), Sheenah S. Ilustrismo (Ilustrismo), Ralph Louie SalaÃ±o (SolaÃ±o), Aireen Monica B. Guzman (Guzman) and Delfino Odias (Odias) [as law students who failed to pass the PhiLSAT], Daryl Dela Cruz (Dela Cruz), Claire Suico (Suico), Aivie S. Pescadero (Pescadero), NiÃ±a Christine Dela Paz (Dela Paz), Shemark K. Queniahan (Queniahan), Al Jay T. Mejos (Mejos), Rocellyn L. DaÃ±o (DaÃ±o), Michael Adolfo (Adolfo), Ronald A. Atig (Atig), Lynette C. Lumayag (Lumayag), Mary Chris Lagera (Lagera), Timothy B. Francisco (Francisco), Sheila Marie C. Dandan (Dandan), Madeline C. Dela PeÃ±a (Dela PeÃ±a), Darlin R. Villamor (Villamor), Lorenzana Llorico (Llorico) and Jan Ivan M. Santamaria (Santamaria) [as current law students who failed to take the PhiLSAT] seeking to invalidate R.A. No. 7662 or, in the alternative, to declare as unconstitutional the PhiLSAT. They also sought the issuance of a TRO to defer the holding of the aptitude test.
[36]
These Petitions were later on consolidated by the Court and oral arguments thereon were held on March 5, 2019.
Temporary Restraining Order
On March 12, 2019, the Court issued a TRO
[37]
 enjoining the LEB from implementing LEBMC No. 18-2018 and, thus, allowing those who have not taken the PhiLSAT prior to the academic year 2018 to 2019, or who have taken the PhiLSAT, but did not pass, or who are honor graduates in college with no PhiLSAT Exemption Certificate, or honor graduates with expired PhiLSAT Exemption Certificates to conditionally enroll as incoming freshmen law students for the academic year 2019 to 2020 under the same terms as LEBMO No. 11-2017.
Subsequently, the LEB issued 
Memorandum Circular No. 27, Series of 2019
 (LEBMC No. 27-2019) stating that the PhiLSAT scheduled on April 7, 2019 will proceed and reiterated the requirements that must be complied with for the conditional enrollment for the academic year 2019 to 2020.
The Parties' Arguments
In G.R. No. 230642
Petitioners in G.R. No. 230642 argue that R.A. No. 7662 and the PhiLSAT are offensive to the Court's power to regulate and supervise the legal profession pursuant to Section 5(5), Article VIII
[38]
 of the Constitution and that the Congress cannot create an administrative office that exercises the Court's power over the practice of law. They also argue that R.A. No. 7662 gives the JBC additional functions to vet nominees for the LEB in violation of Section 8(5), Article VIII
[39]
 of the Constitution.
In their Memorandum, petitioners also question the constitutionality of the LEB's powers under Section 7(c)
[40]
 and 7(e)
[41]
 to prescribe the qualifications and compensation of faculty members and Section 7(h)
[42]
 on the LEB's power to adopt a system of continuing legal education as being repugnant to the Court's rule-making power concerning the practice of law. They also argue that the PhiLSAT violates the academic freedom of law schools and the right to education.
Petitioners-in-intervention meanwhile contend that the PhiLSAT violates the right to liberty and pursuit of happiness of the student-Â­applicants. They posit that the PhiLSAT violates the equal protection clause as it is an arbitrary form of classification not based on substantial distinctions. They also argue that the PhiLSAT violates the right of all citizens to quality and accessible education, violates academic freedom, and is an unfair academic requirement. It is also their position that the PhiLSAT violates due process as it interferes with the right of every person to select a profession or course of study. They also argue that R.A. No. 7662 constitutes undue delegation of legislative powers.
In G.R. No. 242954
Petitioners in G.R. No. 242954 argue that 
certiorari
 and prohibition are proper remedies either under the expanded or traditional jurisdiction of the Court. They also invoke the doctrine of transcendental importance.
Substantively, they contend that R.A. No. 7662, specifically Section 3(a)(2)
[43]
 on the objective of legal education to increase awareness among members of the legal profession, Section 7(e) on law admission, 7(g)
[44]
 on law practice internship, and 7(h) on adopting a system of continuing legal education, and the declaration of policy on continuing legal education
[45]
 infringe upon the power of the Court to regulate admission to the practice of law. They profess that they are not against the conduct of law school admission test 
per se
, only that the LEB cannot impose the PhiLSAT as the power to do so allegedly belongs to the Court.
[46]
It is also their contention that the PhiLSAT violates academic freedom as it interferes with the law school's exercise of freedom to choose who to admit. According to them, the LEB cannot issue penal regulations, and the consequent forfeiture of school fees and the ban on enrollment for those who failed to pass the PhiLSAT violate due process.
The Comments
Procedurally, the Office of the Solicitor General (OSG), representing the LEB, argues that 
certiorari
 and prohibition are not proper to assail the constitutionality of R.A. No. 7662 either under the traditional or expanded concept of judicial power. For the OSG, R.A. No. 7662 was enacted pursuant to the State's power to regulate all educational institutions, and as such, there could be no grave abuse of discretion. It also claims that the Congress is an indispensable party to the petitions.
Substantively, the OSG contends that the Court's power to regulate admission to the practice of law does not include regulation of legal education. It also defends Section 7(e) on the LEB's power to prescribe minimum standards for law admission as referring to admission to law schools; Section 7(g) on the LEB's power to establish a law practice internship as pertaining to the law school curriculum which is within the power of the LEB to regulate; and 7(h) on the LEB's power to adopt a system of continuing legal education as being limited to the training of lawyer-professors.
[47]
 Anent the argument that R.A. No. 7662 gives the JBC additional functions not assigned to it by the Court, the OSG points out that the Court had actually authorized the JBC to process the applications for membership to the LEB making this a non-issue.
In defending the validity of the PhiLSAT, the OSG advances the argument that the PhiLSAT is the minimum standard for entrance to law schools prescribed by the LEB pursuant to the State's power to regulate education. The OSG urges that the PhiLSAT is no different from the National Medical Admission Test (NMAT) which the Court already upheld as a valid exercise of police power in the seminal case of 
Tablarin v. Gutierrez
.
[48]
It is also the position of the OSG that neither the PhiLSAT nor the provisions of R.A. No. 7662 violate academic freedom because the standards for entrance to law school, the standards for accreditation, the prescribed qualifications of faculty members, and the prescribed basic curricula are fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements.
For their part, respondents in-intervention contend that R.A. No. 7662 enjoys the presumption of constitutionality and that the study of law is different from the practice of law.
In its Comment to the Petition-in-Intervention, the OSG dismisses as speculative the argument that the PhiLSAT is anti-poor, and adds that the Court has no competence to rule on whether the PhiLSAT is an unfair or unreasonable requirement, it being a question of policy.
Respondents-in-intervention, for their part, argue that the right of the citizens to accessible education means that the State shall make quality education accessible only to those qualified enough, as determined by fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements. They dispute the claimed intrusion on academic freedom as law schools are not prevented from selecting who to admit among applicants who have passed the PhiLSAT. They stress that the right to education is not absolute and may be regulated by the State, citing 
Calawag v. University of the Philippines Visayas
.
[49]
By way of Reply, petitioners-in-intervention emphasize that the doctrine in 
Tablarin
[50]
 is inapplicable as medical schools are not the same as law schools. They further aver that the decline in enrollment as a result of the implementation of the PhiLSAT is not speculative.
[51]
The Issues
After a careful consideration of the issues raised by the parties in their pleadings and refined during the oral arguments, the issues for resolution are synthesized as follows:
I. Procedural Issues:
Remedies of 
certiorari
 and prohibition; and
Requisites of judicial review and the scope of the Court's review in the instant petitions.
II. Substantive Issues:
Jurisdiction over legal education;
Supervision and regulation of legal education as an exercise of police power;
Reasonable supervision and regulation
Institutional academic freedom
Right to education
LEB's powers under R.A. No. 7662 
vis-a-vis
 the Court's jurisdiction over the practice of law; and
LEB's powers under R.A. No. 7662 
vis-a-vis
 the academic freedom of law schools and the right to education.
The Rulings of the Court
I.
Procedural Issues
A.
Remedies of 
Certiorari
 and Prohibition
The propriety of the remedies of 
certiorari
 and prohibition is assailed on the ground that R.A. No. 7662 is a legislative act and not a judicial, quasi-judicial, or ministerial function. In any case, respondents argue that the issues herein presented involve purely political questions beyond the ambit of judicial review.
The Court finds that petitioners availed of the proper remedies.
The 1935
[52]
 and 1973
[53]
 Constitutions mention, but did not define, "judicial power." In contrast, the 1987 Constitution lettered what judicial power is and even "expanded" its scope.
As constitutionally defined under Section 1, Article VIII of the 1987 Constitution,
[54]
 judicial power is no longer limited to the Court's duty to' settle actual controversies involving rights which are legally demandable and enforceable, or the power of adjudication, but also includes, the duty to determine whether or not there has been grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction on the part of any branch or instrumentality of the Government. This innovation under the 1987 Constitution later on became known as the Court's traditional jurisdiction and expanded jurisdiction, respectively.
[55]
The expanded scope of judicial review mentions "grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction" to harbinger the exercise of judicial review; while petitions for 
certiorari
[56]
 and prohibition
[57]
 speak of "lack or excess of jurisdiction or grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction." Petitions for 
certiorari
 and prohibition as it is understood under Rule 65 of the Rules of Court are traditionally regarded as supervisory writs used as a means by superior or appellate courts, in the exercise of their supervisory jurisdiction, to keep subordinate courts within the bounds of their jurisdictions. As such, writs of 
certiorari
 and prohibition correct only errors of jurisdiction of judicial and quasi-judicial bodies.
[58]
However, considering the commonality of the ground of "grave abuse of discretion," a Rule 65 petition, as a procedural vehicle to invoke the Court's expanded jurisdiction, has been allowed.
[59]
 After all, there is grave abuse of discretion when an act is done contrary to the Constitution, the law or jurisprudence, or is executed whimsically, capriciously or arbitrarily, out of malice, ill will, or personal bias.
[60]
 In 
Spouses Imbong v. Ochoa, Jr.
,
[61]
 the Court emphasized that 
certiorari
, prohibition and 
mandamus
 are appropriate remedies to raise constitutional issues.
That it is a legislative act which is being assailed is likewise not a ground to deny the present petitions.
For one, the 1987 Constitution enumerates under Section 5(2)(a), Article VIII,
[62]
 the Court's irreducible powers which expressly include the power of judicial review, or the power to pass upon the constitutionality or validity of any treaty, international or executive agreement, law, presidential decree, proclamation, order, instruction, ordinance, or regulation.
For another, the Court's expanded jurisdiction, when invoked, permits a review of acts not only by a tribunal, board, or officer exercising judicial, quasi-judicial or ministerial functions, but also by any branch or instrumentality of the Government. "Any branch or instrumentality of the Government" necessarily includes the Legislative and the Executive, even if they are not exercising judicial, quasi-judicial or ministerial functions.
[63]
 As such, the Court may review and/or prohibit or nullify, when proper, acts of legislative and executive officials, there being no plain, speedy, or adequate remedy in the ordinary course of law.
[64]
The power of judicial review over congressional action, in particular, was affirmed in 
Francisco, Jr. v. The House of Representatives
,
[65]
 wherein the Court held:
There is indeed a plethora of cases in which this Court exercised the power of judicial review over congressional action. Thus, in 
Santiago v. Guingona, Jr.
, this Court ruled that 
it is well within the power and jurisdiction of the Court to inquire whether the Senate or its officials committed a violation of the Constitution or grave abuse of discretion in the exercise of their functions and prerogatives
. In 
TaÃ±ada v. Angara
, where petitioners sought to nullify an act of the Philippine Senate on the ground that it contravened the Constitution, it held that the petition raised a justiciable controversy and that 
when an action of the legislative branch is alleged to have seriously infringed the Constitution, it becomes not only the right but in fact the duty of the judiciary to settle the dispute
. In 
Bondoc v. Pineda
, [this Court] declared null and void a resolution of the House of Representatives withdrawing the nomination, and rescinding the election, of a congressman as a member of the House Electoral Tribunal for being violative of Section 17, Article VI of the Constitution. In 
Coseteng v. Mitra
, it held that the resolution of whether the House representation in the Commission on Appointments was based on proportional representation of the political parties as provided in Section 18, Article VI of the Constitution is subject to judicial review. In 
Daza v. Singson
, it held that the act of the House of Representatives in removing the petitioner from the Commission on Appointments is subject to judicial review. In 
TaÃ±ada v. Cuenco
, it held that 
although under the Constitution, the legislative power is vested exclusively in Congress, this does not detract from the power of the courts to pass upon the constitutionality of acts of Congress
. In 
Angara v. Electoral Commission
, it exercised its power of judicial review to determine which between the Electoral Commission and the National Assembly had jurisdiction over an electoral dispute concerning members of the latter. (Internal citations omitted; emphases supplied)
This was reiterated in 
Villanueva v. Judicial and Bar Council
,
[66]
 as follows:
With respect to the Court, however, the remedies of 
certiorari
 and prohibition are necessarily broader in scope and reach, and the writ of 
certiorari
 or prohibition may be issued to correct errors of jurisdiction committed not only by a tribunal, corporation, board or officer exercising judicial, quasi-judicial or ministerial functions but also to set right, undo and restrain any act of grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction by any branch or instrumentality of the Government, even if the latter does not exercise judicial, quasi-judicial or ministerial functions. This application is expressly authorized by the text of the second paragraph of Section 1, supra.
Thus, petitions for 
certiorari
 and prohibition are appropriate remedies to raise constitutional issues and to review and/or prohibit or nullify the acts of legislative and executive officials.
 (Internal citation omitted; emphasis supplied)
Consistently, in 
Samahan ng mga Progresibong Kabataan (SPARK) v. Quezon City
,
[67]
 the remedies of 
certiorari
 and prohibition were regarded as proper vehicles to assail the constitutionality of curfew ordinances, and in 
Agcaoili v. FariÃ±as
,
[68]
 to question the contempt powers of the Congress in the exercise of its power of inquiry in aid of legislation.
The consistency in the Court's rulings as to the propriety of the writs of 
certiorari
 and prohibition under Rule 65 of the Rules of Court to correct errors of jurisdiction committed not only by a tribunal, corporation, board or officer exercising judicial, quasi-judicial or ministerial functions, but also to correct, undo, or restrain any act of grave abuse of discretion on the part of the legislative and the executive, propels the Court to treat the instant petitions in the same manner.
B.
Requisites for Judicial Review
The power of judicial review is tritely defined as the power to review the constitutionality of the actions of the other branches of the government.
[69]
 For a proper exercise of its power of review in constitutional litigation, certain requisites must be satisfied: (1) an actual case or controversy calling for the exercise of judicial power; (2) the person challenging the act must have "standing" to challenge; (3) the question of constitutionality must be raised at the earliest possible opportunity; and (4) the issue of constitutionality must be the very 
lis mota
 of the case.
[70]
These requisites are effective limitations on the Court's exercise of its power of review because judicial review in constitutional cases is quintessentially deferential, owing to the great respect that each co-equal branch of the Government affords to the other.
Of these four requisites, the first two, being the most essential,
[71]
 deserve an extended discussion in the instant case.
1. Actual Case or Controversy
Fundamental in the exercise of judicial power, whether under the traditional or expanded setting, is the presence of an actual case or controversy.
[72]
 An actual case or controversy is one which involves a conflict of legal rights and an assertion of opposite legal claims susceptible of judicial resolution. The case must not be moot or academic, or based on extra-legal or other similar considerations not cognizable by a court of justice.
To be justiciable, the controversy must be definite and concrete, touching on the legal relations of parties having adverse legal interests. It must be shown from the pleadings that there is an active antagonistic assertion of a legal right, on the one hand, and a denial thereof on the other. There must be an actual and substantial controversy and not merely a theoretical question or issue. Further, the actual and substantial controversy must admit specific relief through a conclusive decree and must not merely generate an advisory opinion based on hypothetical or conjectural state of facts.
[73]
Closely associated with the requirement of an actual or justiciable case or controversy is the ripening seeds for adjudication. Ripeness for adjudication has a two-fold aspect: 
first
, the fitness of the issues for judicial decision; and 
second
, the hardship to the parties entailed by withholding court consideration. The first aspect requires that the issue must be purely legal and that the regulation subject of the case is a "final agency action." The second aspect requires that the effects of the regulation must have been felt by the challenging parties in a concrete way.
[74]
To stress, a constitutional question is ripe for adjudication when the challenged governmental act has a direct and existing adverse effect on the individual challenging it.
[75]
 While a reasonable certainty of the occurrence of a perceived threat to a constitutional interest may provide basis for a constitutional challenge, it is nevertheless still required that there are sufficient facts to enable the Court to intelligently adjudicate the issues.
[76]
In this regard, the Court's pronouncement in 
Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities (PACU) v. Secretary of Education
[77]
 deserves reiteration:
It should be understandable, then, that this Court should be doubly reluctant to consider petitioner's demand for avoidance of the law aforesaid, [e]specially where, as respondents assert, petitioners suffered no wrong - nor allege any - from the enforcement of the criticized statute.
It must be evident to any one that the power to declare a legislative enactment void is one which the judge, conscious of the fallibility of human judgment, will shrink from exercising in any case where he can conscientiously and with due regard to duty and official oath decline the responsibility. x x x
When a law has been long treated as constitutional and important rights have become dependent thereon, the Court may refuse to consider an attack on its validity. x x x
As a general rule, the constitutionality of a statute will be passed on only if, and to the extent that, it is directly and necessarily involved in a justiciable controversy and is essential to the protection of the rights of the parties concerned. x x x
x x x x
It is an established principle that to entitle a private individual immediately in danger of sustaining a direct injury as the result of that action and it is not sufficient that he has merely a general [interest] to invoke the judicial power to determine the validity of executive or legislative action he must show that he has sustained or [has an] interest common to all members of the public. x x x
Courts will not pass upon the constitutionality of a law upon the complaint of one who fails to show that he is injured by its operation. x x x
The power of courts to declare a law unconstitutional arises only when the interests of litigants require the use of that judicial authority for their protection against actual interference, a hypothetical threat being insufficient. x x x
Bona fide suit
. - Judicial power is limited to the decision of actual cases and controversies. The authority to pass on the validity of statutes is incidental to the decision of such cases where conflicting claims under the Constitution and under a legislative act assailed as contrary to the Constitution are raised. It is legitimate only in the last resort, and as necessity in the determination of real, earnest, and vital controversy between litigants. x x x
x x x x
An action, like this, is brought for a positive purpose, nay, to obtain actual and positive relief. x x x Courts do not sit to adjudicate mere academic questions to satisfy scholarly interest therein, however intellectually solid the problem may be. This is [e]specially true where the issues "reach constitutional dimensions, for then there comes into play regard for the court's duty to avoid decision of constitutional issues unless avoidance becomes evasion."
 x x x (Internal citations omitted; emphases supplied)
Ultimately, whether an actual case is present or not is determinative of whether the Court's hand should be stayed when there is no adversarial setting and when the prerogatives of the co-equal branches of the Government should instead be respected.
As ruled in 
Republic v. Roque
: 
[78]
A perusal of private respondents' petition for declaratory relief would show that they have failed to demonstrate how they are left to sustain or are in immediate danger to sustain some direct injury as a result of the enforcement of the assailed provisions of RA 9372. Not far removed from the factual milieu in the 
Southern Hemisphere
 cases, private respondents only assert general interests as citizens, and taxpayers and infractions which the government could prospectively commit if the enforcement of the said law would remain untrammelled. As their petition would disclose, private respondents' fear of prosecution was solely based on remarks of certain government officials which were addressed to the general public. 
They, however, failed to show how these remarks tended towards any prosecutorial or governmental action geared towards the implementation of RA 9372 against them. In other words, there was no particular, real or imminent threat to any of them.
 As held in 
Southern Hemisphere
:
Without any justiciable controversy, the petitions have become pleas for declaratory relief, over which the Court has no original jurisdiction. Then again, declaratory actions characterized by "double contingency," where both the activity the petitioners intend to undertake and the anticipated reaction to it of a public official are merely theorized, lie beyond judicial review for lack of ripeness.
The possibility of abuse in the implementation of RA 9372 does not avail to take the present petitions out of the realm of the surreal and merely imagined. Such possibility is not peculiar to RA 9372 since the exercise of any power granted by law may be abused. Allegations of abuse must be anchored on real events before courts may step in to settle actual controversies involving rights which are legally demandable and enforceable. (Internal citations omitted; emphasis supplied)
Concededly, the Court had exercised the power of judicial review by the mere enactment of a law or approval of a challenged action when such is seriously alleged to have infringed the Constitution. In 
Pimentel, Jr. v. Aguirre
:
[79]
First,
 on prematurity. According to the Dissent, when "the conduct has not yet occurred and the challenged construction has not yet been adopted by the agency charged with administering the administrative order, the determination of the scope and constitutionality of the executive action in advance of its immediate adverse effect involves too remote and abstract an inquiry for the proper exercise of judicial function."
This is a rather novel theory - that people should await the implementing evil to befall on them before they can question acts that are illegal or unconstitutional. Be it remembered that the real issue here is whether the Constitution and the law are contravened by Section 4 of AO 372, not whether they are violated by the acts implementing it. In the unanimous 
en banc case TaÃ±ada v. Angara
, this Court held that when an act of the legislative department is seriously alleged to have infringed the Constitution, settling the controversy becomes the duty of this Court. 
By the mere enactment of the questioned law or the approval of the challenged action, the dispute is said to have ripened into a judicial controversy even without any other overt act. Indeed, even a singular violation of the Constitution and/or the law is enough to awaken judicial duty. Said the Court:
In seeking to nullify an act of the Philippine Senate on the ground that it contravenes the Constitution, the petition no doubt raises a justiciable controversy. 
Where an action of the legislative branch is seriously alleged to have infringed the Constitution, it becomes not only the right but in fact the duty of the judiciary to settle the dispute. The question thus posed is judicial rather than political.
 The duty (to adjudicate) remains to assure that the supremacy of the Constitution is upheld. Once a controversy as to the application or interpretation of a constitutional provision is raised before this Court x x x, it becomes a legal issue which the Court is bound by constitutional mandate to decide.
x x x x
As this Court has repeatedly and firmly emphasized in many cases, it will not shirk, digress from or abandon its sacred duty and authority to uphold the Constitution in matters that involve grave abuse of discretion brought before it in appropriate cases, committed by any officer, agency, instrumentality or department of the government.
In the same vein, the Court also held in 
Tatad v. Secretary of the Department of Energy
:
x x x Judicial power includes not only the duty of the courts to settle actual controversies involving rights which are legally demandable and enforceable, but also the duty to determine whether or not there has been grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction on the part of any branch or instrumentality of government. The courts, as guardians of the Constitution, have the inherent authority to determine whether a statute enacted by the legislature transcends the limit imposed by the fundamental law. Where the statute violates the Constitution, it is not only the right but the duty of the judiciary to declare such act unconstitutional and void.
By the same token, when an act of the President, who in our constitutional scheme is a coequal of Congress, is seriously alleged to have infringed the Constitution and the laws, as in the present case, settling the dispute becomes the duty and the responsibility of the courts. (Internal citations omitted; emphases supplied)
In 
Spouses Imbong v. Ochoa
,
[80]
 the Court took cognizance of the petitions despite posing a facial challenge against the entire law as the petitions seriously alleged that fundamental rights have been violated by the assailed legislation:
In this case, the Court is of the view 
that an actual case or controversy exists and that the same is ripe for judicial determination. Considering that the RH Law and its implementing rules have already taken effect and that budgetary measures to carry out the law have already been passed, it is evident that the subject petitions present a justiciable controversy. As stated earlier, when an action of the legislative branch is seriously alleged to have infringed the Constitution, it not only becomes a right, but also a duty of the Judiciary to settle the dispute
.
x x x x
Facial Challenge
The OSG also assails the propriety of the facial challenge lodged by the subject petitions, contending that the RH Law cannot be challenged "on its face" as it is not a speech regulating measure.
The Court is not persuaded.
In United States (
US
) constitutional law, a facial challenge, also known as a First Amendment Challenge, is one that is launched to assail the validity of statutes concerning not only protected speech, but also all other rights in the First Amendment. These include religious freedom, freedom of the press, and the right of the people to peaceably assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances. After all, the fundamental right to religious freedom, freedom of the press and peaceful assembly are but component rights of the right to one's freedom of expression, as they are modes which one's thoughts are externalized.
In this jurisdiction, the application of doctrines originating from the U.S. has been generally maintained, albeit with some modifications. 
While this Court has withheld the application of facial challenges to strictly penal statutes, it has expanded its scope to cover statutes not only regulating free speech, but also those involving religious freedom, and other fundamental rights.
 The underlying reason for this modification is simple. 
For unlike its counterpart in the U.S., this Court, under its expanded jurisdiction, is mandated by the Fundamental Law not only to settle actual controversies involving rights which are legally demandable and enforceable, but also to determine whether or not there has been a grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction on the part of any branch or instrumentality of the Government. Verily, the framers of Our Constitution envisioned a proactive Judiciary, ever vigilant with its duty to maintain the supremacy of the Constitution.
Consequently, considering that the foregoing petitions have seriously alleged that the constitutional human rights to life, speech and religion and other fundamental rights mentioned above have been violated by the assailed legislation, the Court has authority to take cognizance of these kindred petitions and to determine if the RH Law can indeed pass constitutional scrutiny.
 To dismiss these petitions on the simple expedient that there exist no actual case or controversy, would diminish this Court as a reactive branch of government, acting only when the Fundamental Law has been transgressed, to the detriment of the Filipino people. (Internal citations omitted; emphases supplied)
[81]
Likewise in 
Belgica v. Ochoa
,
[82]
 the Court held that the requirement of an actual case or controversy is satisfied by the antagonistic positions taken by the parties:
The requirement of contrariety of legal rights is clearly satisfied by the antagonistic positions of the parties on the constitutionality of the "Pork Barrel System." Also, the questions in these consolidated cases are ripe for adjudication since the challenged funds and the provisions allowing for their utilization-such as the 2013 GAA for the PDAF, PD 910 for the Malampaya Funds and PD 1869, as amended by PD 1993, for the Presidential Social Fund - are currently existing and operational; hence, there exists an immediate or threatened injury to petitioners as a result of the unconstitutional use of these public funds.
1(a). Scope of Judicial Review
To determine whether petitioners presented an actual case or controversy, or have seriously alleged that R.A. No. 7662 suffers from constitutional infirmities to trigger the Court's power of judicial review, resort must necessarily be had to the pleadings filed.
Petitioners in G.R. No. 230642 allege that R.A. No. 7662 and the LEB issuances relative to the admission and practice of law encroach upon the powers of the Court.
[83]
 It is their position that the powers given to the LEB are directly related to the Court's powers.
[84]
 In particular, they argue that the LEB's power to adopt a system of continuing legal education under Section 7(h) of R.A. No. 7662 falls within the authority of the Court.
[85]
 In their Memorandum, they additionally argue that the LEB's powers to prescribe the qualifications and compensation of faculty members under Section 7(c) and 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662, Sections 50-51 of LEBMO No. 1, and Resolution No. 2014-02 intrude into the Court's rule-making power relative to the practice of law.
[86]
 They also argue that the PhiLSAT violates the academic freedom of law schools and the right to education.
[87]
 It is their contention that the LEB is without power to impose sanctions.
[88]
 They also question the authority of the LEB Chairperson and Members to act in a hold-over capacity.
[89]
For their part, petitioners-in-intervention allege that the PhiLSAT requirement resulted to a reduced number of law student enrollees for St. Thomas More School of Law and Business, Inc. and constrained said law school to admit only students who passed the PhiLSAT which is against their policy of admitting students based on values.
[90]
 Their co-petitioners are students who either applied for law school, failed to pass the PhiLSAT, or, were conditionally enrolled. Thus, they argue that Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662 and the PhiLSAT violate the law school's academic freedom.
Petitioners in G.R. No. 242954 allege that they are current law students who failed to pass and/or take the PhiLSAT, and who are therefore threatened with the revocation of their conditional enrollment and stands to be barred from enrolling. Twelve of the 23 petitioners in G.R. No. 242954 were not allowed to enroll for failure to pass and/or take the PhiLSAT.
It is their argument that the LEB's power under Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662 to prescribe minimum standards for law admission, Section 7(g) to establish a law practice internship, Section 7(h) to adopt a system of continuing legal education, and Section 3(a)(2) on the stated objective of legal education to increase awareness among members of the legal profession of the needs of the poor, deprived and oppressed sectors of society usurp the Court's rule-making powers concerning admission to the practice of law.
[91]
 In addition, they argue that the PhiLSAT issuances violate academic freedom, and that the LEB is not authorized to revoke conditional enrollment nor is it authorized to forfeit school fees and impose a ban enrollment which are penal sanctions violative of the due process clause. They also argue that the classification of students to those who have passed or failed the PhiLSAT for purposes of admission to law school is repugnant to the equal protection clause.
The petitions therefore raise an actual controversy insofar as they allege that R.A. No. 7662, specifically Section 2, paragraph 2, Section 3(a)(2), Section 7(c), (e), (g), and (h) of R.A. No. 7662 infringe upon the Court's power to promulgate rules concerning the practice of law and upon institutional academic freedom and the right to quality education. Necessarily, a review of the LEB issuances when pertinent to these assailed provisions of R.A. No. 7662 shall also be undertaken.
2. Legal Standing
Inextricably linked with the actual case or controversy requirement is that the party presenting the justiciable issue must have the standing to mount a challenge to the governmental act.
By jurisprudence, standing requires a personal and substantial interest in the case such that the petitioner has sustained, or will sustain, direct injury as a result of the violation of its rights,
[92]
 thus:
Legal standing or 
locus standi
 is the "right of appearance in a court of justice on a given question." To possess legal standing, parties must show "a personal and substantial interest in the case such that [they have] sustained or will sustain direct injury as a result of the governmental act that is being challenged." 
The requirement of direct injury guarantees that the party who brings suit has such personal stake in the outcome of the controversy and, in effect, assures "that concrete adverseness which sharpens the presentation of issues upon which the court depends for illumination of difficult constitutional questions."
[93]
 (Emphasis supplied)
The rule on standing admits of recognized exceptions: the over breadth doctrine, taxpayer suits, third-party standing and the doctrine of transcendental importance.
[94]
Petitioners-in-intervention Caballero, Castardo, Bringas, Federe and Matutino, being graduates of a four-year college course and applicants as first year law students, as well as petitioners Abayata, Vasquez, Ilustrismo, SalaÃ±o, Guzman and Odias, as law students who failed to pass the PhiLSAT and were denied admission to law school for the academic year 2018 to 2019, and petitioners Dela Cruz, Suico, Pescadero, Dela Paz, Queniahan, Mejos, DaÃ±o, Adolfo, Atig, Lumayag, Lagera, Francisco, Dandan, Dela PeÃ±a, Villamor, Llorico and Santamaria, being law students who were conditionally enrolled, possess the requisite standing to challenge the constitutionality of Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662 and the implementing LEB issuances, as they were, in fact, required to take the PhiLSAT, or to comply with the terms of the conditional enrollment and failing which, were denied admission as regular students to law school.
Petitioner-in-intervention St. Thomas More School of Law and Business, Inc., likewise sufficiently alleges injury that it has sustained in the form of reduced number of enrollees due to the PhiLSAT requirement and the curtailment of its discretion on who to admit in its law school. Under the specific and concrete facts available in this case, these petitioners have demonstrated that they were, or tend to be directly and substantially, injured.
Meanwhile, petitioners Pimentel, Comafay, Gorospe, Sandoval, Loanzon, Perez, Cacho, Espaldon, Albano, Siazon, Artugue, Lacsina, Liu, Buenviaje, Nicolas, Tolentino, and Gruyal; and petitioners-in intervention Rapista, Rapista-Tan, Tan, Enterina and Villarico commonly anchor their standing to challenge R.A. No. 7662 and the PhiLSAT as citizens.
Standing as a citizen has been upheld by this Court in cases where a petitioner is able to craft an issue of transcendental importance or when paramount public interest is involved.
[95]
Legal standing may be extended to petitioners for having raised a "constitutional issue of critical significance."
[96]
 Without a doubt, the delineation of the Court's rule-making power 
vis-a-vis
 the supervision and regulation of legal education and the determination of the reach of the State's supervisory and regulatory power in the context of the guarantees of academic freedom and the right to education are novel issues with far-Â­reaching implications that deserve the Court's immediate attention. In taking cognizance of the instant petitions, the Court is merely exercising its power to promulgate rules towards the end that constitutional rights are protected and enforced.
[97]
Now, to the core substantive issues.
II.
Substantive Issues
A.
Jurisdiction Over Legal Education
Petitioners in G.R. No. 230642 argue that the Court's power to promulgate rules concerning the admission to the practice of law necessarily includes the power to do things related to the practice of law, including the power to prescribe the requirements for admission to the study of law. In support, they point to Sections 6
[98]
 and 16,
[99]
 Rule 138 of the Rules of Court. They contend that the Congress cannot create an administrative body, like the LEB, that exercises this rule-making power of the Court. They emphasize that the LEB belongs to the Executive department, and, as such, is not linked or accountable to the Court nor placed under the Court's regulation and supervision.
For their part, petitioners in G.R. No. 242954 maintain that the Court exercises authority over the legal profession which includes the admission to the practice of law, to the continuing requirements for and discipline of lawyers.
[100]
 According to them, the rule-making power of the Court is plenary in all cases regarding the admission to and supervision of the practice of law. They argue that the Court's power to admit members to the practice of law extends to admission to legal education because the latter is a preparatory process to the application for admission to the legal profession, which "residual power" of the Court can be inferred from Sections 5
[101]
 and 6, Rule 138 of the Rules of Court. They also emphasize that under Sections 1
[102]
 and 2
[103]
 of Rule 138-A, non-lawyers are allowed to have limited practice of law and are held to answer by the Court under the same rules on privileged communication and standard of conduct pursuant to Sections 3
[104]
 and 4
[105]
 of Rule 138-A.
[106]
Contrary to petitioner's claims, the Court has no primary and direct jurisdiction over legal education. Neither the history of the Philippine legal education nor the Rules of Court invoked by petitioners support their argument. The supervision and regulation of legal education is an Executive function.
                
1. 
    
Regulation and supervision of legal education had been historically and consistently exercised by the political departments
 
Legal education in the Philippines was institutionalized in 1734, with the establishment of the Faculty of Civil Law in the University of Santo Tomas with Spanish as the medium of instruction. Its curriculum was identical to that adopted during the time in the universities in Europe
[107]
 and included subjects on Civil Law, Canon Law, ecclesiastical discipline and elements of Natural Law.
[108]
In 1901, Act No. 74 was passed centralizing the public school system, and establishing the Department of Public Instruction headed by the General Superintendent.
[109]
 The archipelago was then divided into school divisions and districts for effective management of the school system. It was through Act No. 74 that a Trade School
[110]
 and a Normal School
[111]
 in Manila and a School of Agriculture in Negros were established.
[112]
In 1908, the legislature approved Act No. 1870 which created the University of the Philippines (UP). However, English law courses were not offered until 1910 when the Educational Department Committee of the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA), through the efforts of Justice George Malcolm, offered law courses in the English language. In 1911, UP adopted these classes by formally establishing its College of Law,
[113]
 with its first graduates being students who studied at YMCA.
[114]
 The curriculum adopted by the UP College of Law became the model of the legal education curriculum of the other law schools in the country.
[115]
Private schools were formally regulated in 1917 with the passage of Act No. 2706
[116]
 which made obligatory the recognition and inspection of private schools and colleges by the Secretary of Public Instruction, so as to maintain a standard of efficiency in all private schools and colleges
[117]
 in the country. As such, the Secretary of Public Instruction was authorized to inspect schools and colleges to determine efficiency of instruction and to make necessary regulations. Likewise, under Act No. 2706, the Secretary of Public Instruction was specifically authorized to prepare and publish, from time to time, in pamphlet form, the minimum standards required of law schools and other schools giving instruction of a technical or professional character.
[118]
In 1924, a survey of the Philippine education and of all educational institutions, facilities and agencies was conducted through Act No. 3162, which created the Board of Educational Survey. Among the factual findings of the survey was that schools at that time were allowed to operate with almost no supervision at all. This led to the conclusion that a great majority of schools from primary grade to the university are money-making devices of persons who organize and administer them. Thus, it was recommended that some board of control beÂ· organized under legislative control to supervise their administration.
[119]
 It was further recommended that legislation be enacted to prohibit the opening of any school without the permission of the Secretary of Public Instruction. The grant of the permission was, in turn, predicated upon a showing that the school is compliant with the proper standards as to the physical structure, library and laboratory facilities, ratio of student to teacher and the qualifications of the teachers.
[120]
Consistent with these statutory precursors, the 1935 Constitution expressed in no uncertain terms that "[a]ll educational institutions shall be under the supervision and subject to regulation by the State."
[121]
This was followed by several other statutes such as the Commonwealth Act No. 578
[122]
 which vests upon teachers, professors, and persons charged with the supervision of public or duly-recognized private schools, colleges and universities the status of "persons in authority" and Republic Act No. 139
[123]
 which created the Board of Textbooks, mandating all public schools to use only the books approved by the Board and allowing all private schools to use textbooks of their choice, provided it is not against the law or public policy or offensive to dignity.
[124]
In 1947, the Department of Instruction was changed to the Department of Education.
[125]
 During this period, the regulation and supervision of public and private schools belonged to the Bureau of Public and Private Schools. The regulation of law schools in particular was undertaken by the Bureau of Private Schools through a special consultant who acted as a supervisor of the law schools and as a national coordinator of the law deans.
[126]
The Department of Education, through its Bureau of Private Schools, issued a Manual of Instructions for Private Schools which contained the rules and regulations pertaining to the qualifications of the faculty and deans, faculty load and library holdings of private learning institutions.
[127]
 Meantime, a Board of National Education was created
[128]
 with the task of formulating, implementing and enforcing general educational policies and coordinating the offerings and functions of all educational institutions. The Board of National Education was later renamed as the National Board of Education.
[129]
 In 1972, the Department of Education became the Department of Education and Culture,
[130]
 and was later on renamed as the Ministry of Education and Culture in 1978.
[131]
Meanwhile, the 1973 Constitution remained consistent in mandating that all educational institutions shall be under the supervision of and subject to regulation by the State.
[132]
With the passage of Batas Pambansa Bilang 232
[133]
 (B.P. Blg. 232) or the 
Education Act of 1982
, the regulatory rules on both formal and nonÂ­-formal systems in public and private schools in all levels of the entire educational system were codified. The National Board of Education was abolished, and instead, a Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports (MECS) was organized to supervise and regulate educational institutions. Part and parcel of the MECS' authority to supervise and regulate educational institutions is its authority to recognize or accredit educational institutions of all levels.
[134]
Accordingly, the MECS was given the authority over public and private institutions of higher education, as well as degree-granting programs, in all post-secondary public and private educational institutions.
[135]
 In particular, a Board of Higher Education
[136]
 was established as an advisory body to the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports with the functions of making policy recommendations on the planning and management of the integrated system of higher education and recommending steps to improve the governance of the higher education system. Apart from the Board of Higher Education, a Bureau of Higher Education was also established to formulate and evaluate programs and educational standards for higher education
[137]
 and to assist the Board of Higher Education. Law schools were placed, under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Higher Education.
[138]
The MECS later became the DECS in 1987 under Executive Order No. 117
[139]
 (E.O. No. 117). Nevertheless, the power of the MECS to supervise all educational institutions remained unchanged.
[140]
The Administrative Code
[141]
 also states that it shall be the State that shall protect and promote the right of all citizens to quality education at all levels, and shall take appropriate steps to make such education accessible to all; and that the DECS shall be primarily responsible for the formulation, planning, implementation, and coordination of the policies, plans, programs and projects in the areas of formal and non-formal education. The Administrative Code also empowered the Board of Higher Education to create technical panels of experts in the various disciplines including law, to undertake curricula development.
[142]
 As will be discussed hereunder, the 1987 Constitution crystallized the power of the State to supervise and regulate all educational institutions.
[143]
                
2. 
    
DECS Order No. 27-1989 was the precursor of R.A. No. 7662
 
Pursuant to its mandate under B.P. Blg. 232, the DECS promulgated 
DECS Order No. 27, Series of 1989
 (DECS Order No. 27-1989),
[144]
 in close coordination with the Philippine Association of Law Schools, the Philippine Association of Law Professors and the Bureau of Higher Education. DECS Order No. 27-1989 specifically outlined the policies and standards for legal education, and superseded all existing policies and standards related to legal education. These policies were made applicable beginning school year 1989 to 1990.
"Legal education" was defined in DECS Order No. 27-1989 as an educational program including a clinical program appropriate and essential in the understanding and application of law and the administration of justice. It is professional education after completion of a required pre-legal education at the college level. For state colleges and universities, the operation of their law schools was to depend on their respective charters, and for private colleges and universities, by the rules and regulations issued by the DECS. Nevertheless, it was made clear under DECS Order No. 27-1989 that the administration of a law school shall be governed primarily by the law school's own policies and the provisions thereof apply only suppletorily.
[145]
Likewise, in generally permissive terms, DECS Order No. 27-1989 prescribed the preferred qualifications and functions of a law dean, as well as the preferred qualifications, conditions of employment and teaching load of law faculty members. It also prescribed the general inclusions to the law curriculum, but gave the law schools the prerogative to design its own curriculum. The DECS also drew a model law curriculum, thus, revising the 122-unit curriculum prescribed in 1946 by the Office of Private Education, as well as the 134-unit curriculum prescribed in 1963. The law schools were also given the option to maintain a legal aid clinic as part of its law curriculum. It also prescribed the need for law schools to have relevant library resources. Applicants for a law course are required to comply with the specific requirements for admission by the Bureau of Higher Education and the Court.
Such was the state of the regulation of legal education until the enactment of R.A. No. 7662 in 1993. In 1994, R.A. No. 7722
[146]
 was passed creating the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) tasked to supervise tertiary degree programs. Except for the regulation and supervision of law schools which was to be undertaken by the LEB under R.A. No. 7662, the structure of DECS as embodied in E.O. No. 117 remained practically unchanged.
Due to the fact that R.A. No. 7662 was yet to be implemented with the organization of the LEB, the CHED, meanwhile, assumed the function of supervising and regulating law schools. For this purpose, the CHED constituted a Technical Panel for Legal Education which came up with a Revised Policies and Standards for Legal Education, which, however, was unpublished.
                
3. 
    
Legal education is a mere composite of the educational system
 
As recounted, the historical development of statutes on education unerringly reflects the consistent exercise by the political departments of the power to supervise and regulate all levels and areas of education, including legal education.
Legal education is but a composite of the entire Philippine education system. It is perhaps unique because it is a specialized area of study. This peculiarity, however, is not reason in itself to demarcate legal education and withdraw it from the regulatory and supervisory powers of the political branches.
Notwithstanding, petitioners maintain that legal education, owing to its specialized "legal" nature and being preparatory to the practice of law, should fall within the regulation and supervision of the Court itself. Petitioners in G.R. No. 242954 went as far as professing that they are not against the creation of an administrative body that will supervise and regulate law schools, only that such body should be placed under the Court's supervision and control.
Two principal reasons militate against such proposition:
First
, it assumes that the Court, in fact, possesses the power to supervise and regulate legal education as a necessary consequence of its power to regulate the admission to the practice of law. This assumption, apart from being manifestly contrary to the above-recounted history of legal education in the Philippines, is likewise devoid of legal anchorage.
Second
, the Court exercises only judicial functions and it cannot, and must not, arrogate upon itself a power that is not constitutionally vested to it, lest the Court itself violates the doctrine of separation of powers. For the Court to void R.A. No. 7662 and thereafter, to form a body that regulates legal education and place it under its supervision and control, as what petitioners suggest, is to demonstrate a highly improper form of judicial activism.
                
4.
    
 Court's exclusive rule-making power covers the practice of law and not the study of law
 
The Constitution lays down the powers which the Court can exercise. Among these is the power to promulgate rules concerning admission to the practice of law.
The rule-making power of the Supreme Court had been uniformly granted under the 1935, the 1973 and the 1987 Constitutions. The complexion of the rule-making power, however, changes with the promulgation of these organic laws.
Under the 1935 Constitution, existing laws on pleading, practice and procedure were repealed and were instead converted as the Rules of Court which the Court can alter and modify. The Congress, on the other hand, was given the power to repeal, alter or supplement the rules on pleading, practice and procedure, and the admission to the practice of law promulgated by the Court.
[147]
This power to promulgate rules concerning pleading, practice and procedure, and admission to the practice of law is in fact zealously guarded by the Court.
Thus, in 
Philippine Lawyers Association v. Agrava
,
[148]
 the Court asserted its "exclusive" and constitutional power with respect to the admission to the practice of law and when the act falls within the term "practice of law," the Rules of Court govern.
[149]
In 
In Re: Petition of A.E. Garcia
,
[150]
 the Court withheld from the executive the power to modify the laws and regulations governing admission to the practice of law as the prerogative to promulgate rules for admission to the practice of law belongs to the Court and the power to repeal, alter, or supplement such rules is reserved only to the Congress.
Even then, the character of the power of the Congress to repeal, alter, or supplement the rules concerning pleading, practice, and procedure, and the admission to the practice of law under the 1935 Constitution was held not to be absolute and that any law passed by the Congress on the matter is merely permissive, being that the power concerning admission to the practice of law is primarily a judicial function.
The 1973 Constitution is no less certain in reiterating the Court's power to promulgate rules concerning pleading, practice, and procedure in all courts and the admission to the practice of law. As observed in 
Echegaray v. Secretary of Justice
,
[151]
 the 1973 Constitution further strengthened the independence of the judiciary by giving it the additional power to promulgate rules governing the integration of the Bar.
[152]
The ultimate power to promulgate rules on pleading, practice, and procedure, the admission to the practice of law, and the integration of the Bar remains to be with the Court under the 1973 Constitution even when the power of the Batasang Pambansa to pass laws of permissive and corrective character repealing, altering, or supplementing such rules was retained.
The 1987 Constitution departed from the 1935 and the 1973 organic laws in the sense that it took away from the Congress the power to repeal, alter, or supplement the rules concerning pleading, practice, and procedure, and the admission to the practice of law, and the integration of the Bar and therefore vests exclusively and beyond doubt, the power to promulgate such rules to the Court, thereby supporting a "stronger and more independent judiciary."
[153]
While the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions "textualized a power-sharing scheme" between the legislature and the Court in the enactment of judicial rules,
[154]
 the 1987 Constitution "textually altered the power-sharing scheme" by deleting the Congress' subsidiary and corrective power.
[155]
Accordingly, the Court's exclusive power of admission to the Bar has been interpreted as vesting upon the Court the authority to define the practice of law,
[156]
 to determine who will be admitted to the practice of law,
[157]
 to hold in contempt any person found to be engaged in unauthorized practice of law,
[158]
 and to exercise corollary disciplinary authority over members of the Bar.
[159]
The act of admitting, suspending, disbarring and reinstating lawyers in the practice of law is a judicial function because it requires "(1) previously established rules and principles; (2) concrete facts, whether past or present, affecting determinate individuals; and (3) decision as to whether these facts are governed by the rules and principles."
[160]
Petitioners readily acknowledge that legal education or the study of law is not the practice of law, the former being merely preparatory to the latter. In fact, the practice of law has a settled jurisprudential meaning:
The practice of law is not limited to the conduct of cases or litigation in court; it embraces the preparation of pleadings and other papers incident to actions and social proceedings, the management of such actions and proceedings on behalf of clients before judges and courts, and in addition, conveying. In general, all advice to clients, and all action taken for them in matters connected with the law corporation services, assessment and condemnation services contemplating an appearance before a judicial body, the foreclosure of a mortgage, enforcement of a creditor's claim in bankruptcy and insolvency proceedings, and conducting proceedings in attachment, and in matters of estate and guardianship have been held to constitute law practice as the preparation and drafting of legal instruments, where the work done involves the determination by the trained legal mind of the legal effect of facts and conditions.
Practice of law under modern conditions consists in no small part of work performed outside of any court and having no immediate relation to proceedings in court. It embraces conveyancing, the giving of legal advice on a large variety of subjects, and the preparation and execution of legal instruments covering an extensive field of business and trust relations and other affairs. Although these transactions may have no direct connection with court proceedings, they are always subject to become involved in litigation. They require in many aspects a high degree of legal skill, a wide experience with men and affairs, and great capacity for adaptation to difficult and complex situations. These customary functions of an attorney or counselor at law bear an intimate relation to the administration of justice by the courts. No valid distinction, so far as concerns the question set forth in the order, can be drawn between that part of the work of the lawyer which involved appearance in court and that part which involves advice and drafting of instruments in his office. It is of importance to the welfare of the public that these manifold customary functions be performed by persons possessed of adequate learning and skill, of sound moral character, and acting at all times under the heavy trust obligations to clients which rests upon all attorneys.
[161]
 (Internal citations omitted)
The definition of the practice of law, no matter how broad, cannot be further enlarged as to cover the study of law.
                
5.
    
The Court exercises judicial power only
    
 
Section 12, Article VIII of the 1987 Constitution clearly provides that "[t]he Members of the Supreme Court and of other courts established by law shall not be designated to any agency performing quasi-judicial or administrative functions." The Court exercises judicial power only and should not assume any duty alien to its judicial functions, the basic postulate being the separation of powers. As early as 
Manila Electric Co. v. Pasay Transportation Co.
,
[162]
 the Court already stressed:
The Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands represents one of the three divisions of power in our government. 
It is judicial power and judicial power only which is exercised by the Supreme Court.
 Just as the Supreme Court, as the guardian of constitutional rights, should not sanction usurpations by any other department of the government, so should it as strictly confine its own sphere of influence to the powers expressly or by implication conferred on it by the Organic Act. 
The Supreme Court and its members should not and cannot be required to exercise any power or to perform any trust or to assume any duty not pertaining to or connected with the administering of judicial functions.
 (Emphases supplied)
Neither may the regulation and supervision of legal education be justified as an exercise of the Court's "residual" power. A power is residual if it does not belong to either of the two co-equal branches and which the remaining branch can, thus, exercise consistent with its functions. Regulation and supervision of legal education is primarily exercised by the Legislative and implemented by the Executive, thus, it cannot be claimed by the judiciary.
It is with studied restraint that the Court abstains from exercising a power that is not strictly judicial, or that which is not expressly granted to it by the Constitution.
[163]
 This judicial abstention is neither avoidance nor dereliction - there is simply no basis for the Court to supervise and regulate legal education. 
Court supervision over legal education is nevertheless urged
[164]
 to the same extent as the Court administers, supervises and controls the Philippine Judicial Academy (PHILJA).
[165]
 The parallelism is mislaid because the PHILJA is intended for judicial education.
[166]
 It particularly serves as the "training school for justices, judges, court personnel, lawyers and aspirants to judicial posts."
[167]
 Court supervision over judicial education is but consistent with the Court's power of supervision over all courts and the personnel thereof.
[168]
Still, petitioners insist that the Court actually regulated legal education through Sections 5, 6, and 16 of Rule 138 and Sections 1, 2, 3, and 4 of Rule 138-A of the 1997 Rules of Court. On the contrary, the Rules of Court do not intend nor provide for direct and actual Court regulation over legal education. At most, the Rules of Court are reflective of the inevitable relationship between legal education and the admissions to the bar.
                
6.
    
The Rules of Court do not support the argument that the Court directly and actually regulates legal education
    
 
While the power of the Court to promulgate rules concerning admission to the practice of law exists under the 1935 Constitution and reiterated under the 1973 and 1987 Constitutions, the Court has not promulgated any rule that directly and actually regulates legal education.
Instead, the 1964 Rules of Court concerned only the practice of law, admission to the bar, admission to the bar examination, bar examinations, and the duties, rights and conduct of attorneys. The 1997 Rules of Court is no different as it contained only the rules on attorneys and admission to the bar under Rule 138, the law student practice rule under Rule 138-A, the integrated bar in Rule 139-A and disbarment and discipline of attorneys in Rule 139-B.
[169]
In the exercise of its power to promulgate rules concerning the admission to the practice of law, the Court has prescribed the subjects covered by, as well as the qualifications of candidates to the bar examinations. Only those bar examination candidates who are found to have obtained a passing grade are admitted to the bar and licensed to practice law.
[170]
 The regulation of the admission to the practice of law goes hand in hand with the commitment of the Court and the members of the Philippine Bar to maintain a high standard for the legal profession. To ensure that the legal profession is maintained at a high standard, only those who are known to be honest, possess good moral character, and show proficiency in and knowledge of the law by the standard set by the Court by passing the bar examinations honestly and in the regular and usual manner are admitted to the practice of law.
[171]
Thus, under the 1997 Rules of Court, admission to the bar requires: (1) furnishing satisfactory proof of educational, moral, and other qualifications; (2) passing the bar examinations;
[172]
 and (3) taking the lawyer's oath,
[173]
 signing the roll of attorneys and receiving from the clerk of court a certificate of the license to practice.
[174]
 An applicant for admission to the bar must have these qualifications: (1) must be a citizen of the Philippines; (2) must at least be 21 years of age; (3) must be of good moral character; (4) must be a resident of the Philippines; (5) must produce satisfactory evidence of good moral character; and (6) no charges against the applicant, involving moral turpitude, have been filed or are pending in any court in the Philippines.
[175]
 It is beyond argument that these are the requisites and qualifications for admission to the practice of law and not for admission to the study of law.
In turn, to be admitted to the bar examinations, an applicant must first meet the core academic qualifications prescribed under the Rules of Court.
6(a). Sections 5, 6, and 16, Rule 138
Section 5 provides that the applicant should have studied law for four years and have successfully completed all the prescribed courses. This section was amended by Bar Matter No. 1153,
[176]
 to require applicants to "successfully [complete] all the prescribed courses for the degree of Bachelor of Laws or its equivalent, in a law school or university officially recognized by the Philippine Government, or by the proper authority in foreign jurisdiction where the degree has been granted." Bar Matter No. 1153 further provides that a Filipino citizen who is a graduate of a foreign law school shall be allowed to take the bar examinations only upon the submission to the Court of the required certifications.
In addition to the core courses of civil law, commercial law, remedial law, criminal law, public and private international law, political law, labor and social legislation, medical jurisprudence, taxation, and legal ethics, Section 5 was further amended by 
A.M. No. 19-03-24-SC or the Revised Law Student Practice Rule dated June 25, 2019
 to include Clinical Legal Education as a core course that must be completed by an applicant to the bar examinations.
Notably, Section 5, Rule 138 of the Rules of Court, as amended, is not directed to law schools, but to those who would like to take the bar examinations and enumerates the academic competencies required of them. The Court does not impose upon law schools what courses to teach, or the degree to grant, but prescribes only the core academic courses which it finds essential for an applicant to be admitted to the bar. Law schools enjoy the autonomy to teach or not to teach these courses. In fact, the Court even extends recognition to a degree of Bachelor of Laws or its equivalent obtained abroad or that granted by a foreign law school for purposes of qualifying to take the Philippine Bar Examinations, subject only to the submission of the required certifications. Section 5 could not therefore be interpreted as an exercise of the Court's regulatory or supervisory power over legal education since, for obvious reasons, its reach could not have possibly be extended to legal education in foreign jurisdictions.
In similar fashion, Section 6, Rule 138 of the Rules of Court requires that an applicant to the bar examinations must have completed a four-year high school course and a bachelor's degree in arts or sciences. Again, this requirement is imposed upon the applicant to the bar examinations and not to law schools. These requirements are merely consistent with the nature of a law degree granted in the Philippines which is a professional, as well as a post-baccalaureate degree.
It is a reality that the Rules of Court, in prescribing the qualifications in order to take the bar examinations, had placed a considerable constraint on the courses offered by law schools. Adjustments in the curriculum, for instance, is a compromise which law schools apparently are willing to take in order to elevate its chances of graduating future bar examinees. It is in this regard that the relationship between legal education and admissions to the bar becomes unmistakable. This, however, does not mean that the Court has or exercises jurisdiction over legal education. Compliance by law schools with the prescribed core courses is but a recognition of the Court's exclusive jurisdiction over admissions to the practice of law - that no person shall be allowed to take the bar examinations and thereafter, be admitted to the Philippine Bar without having taken and completed the required core courses.
Section 16, Rule 138 of the Rules of Court, on the other hand, provides that those who fail the bar examinations for three or more times must take a refresher course. Similarly, this is a requirement imposed upon the applicant. The Court does not impose that a law school should absolutely include in its curriculum a refresher course.
6(b). Revised Law Student Practice Rule
Neither does Rule 138-A of the Rules of Court as amended by A.M. No. 19-03-24-SC on law student practice manifest the Court's exercise of supervision or regulation over legal education. The three-fold rationale of the law student practice rule is as follows:
1. [T]o ensure that there will be no miscarriage of justice as a result of incompetence or inexperience of law students, who, not having as yet passed the test of professional competence, are presumably not fully equipped to act [as] counsels on their own;
2. [T]o provide a mechanism by which the accredited law school clinic may be able to protect itself from any potential vicarious liability arising from some culpable action by their law students; and
3. [T]o ensure consistency with the fundamental principle that no person is allowed to practice a particular profession without possessing the qualifications, particularly a license, as required by law.
[177]
Consistently, the Revised Law Student Practice Rule is primordially intended to ensure access to justice of the marginalized sectors and to regulate the law student practitioner's limited practice of law pursuant to the Court's power to promulgate rules on pleading, practice, and procedure in all courts, the Integrated Bar, and legal assistance to the underprivileged.
In allowing the law student and in governing the conduct of the law student practitioner, what the Court regulates and supervises is not legal education, but the appearance and conduct of a law student before any trial court, tribunal, board, or officer, to represent indigent clients of the legal clinic - an activity rightfully falling under the definition of practice of law. Inasmuch as the law student is permitted to act for the legal clinic and thereby to practice law, it is but proper that the Court exercise regulation and supervision over the law student practitioner. Necessarily, the Court has the power to allow their appearance and plead their case, and hereafter, to regulate their actions.
In all, the Rules of Court do not support petitioners' argument that the Court regulates and supervises legal education. To reiterate, the Rules of Court are directed not towards legal education or law schools, but towards applicants for admission to the bar and applicants for admission to the bar examinations - consistent with the Court's power to promulgate rules concerning admission to the practice of law, the same being fundamentally a judicial function.
Having, thus, established that the regulation and supervision of legal education do not fall within the competence of the Court and is, instead, a power exercised by the political departments, the Court now proceeds to determine the extent of such police power in relation to legal education.
B.
Reasonable Supervision and Regulation of Legal 
Education as an Exercise of Police Power
The term police power was first used
[178]
 in jurisprudence in 1824 in 
Gibbons v. Ogden
[179]
 where the U.S. Supreme Court, through Chief Justice Marshall, held that the regulation of navigation by steamboat operators for purposes of interstate commerce was a power reserved to and exercised by the Congress, thus, negating state laws interfering with the exercise of that power. Likewise often cited is 
Commonwealth v. Alger
[180]
 which defined police power as "the power vested in legislature by the [C]onstitution, to make, ordain, and establish all manner of wholesome and reasonable laws, statutes, and ordinances, either with penalties or without, not repugnant to the [C]onstitution, as they shall judge to be for the good and welfare of the Commonwealth, and of the subjects of the same."
Closer to home, early Philippine jurisprudence pertain to police power as the power to promote the general welfare and public interest;
[181]
 to enact such laws in relation to persons and property as may promote public health, public morals, public safety and the general welfare of each inhabitant;
[182]
 to preserve public order and to prevent offenses against the state and to establish for the intercourse of [citizens] those rules of good manners and good neighborhood calculated to prevent conflict of rights.
[183]
In 
Ermita-Malate Hotel and Motel [Operators] Association, Inc. v. City Mayor of Manila
,
[184]
 the nature and scope of police power was reaffirmed as embracing the power to prescribe regulations to promote the health, morals, education, good order, safety, or the general welfare of the people. It is negatively defined as the authority to enact legislation that may interfere with personal liberty or property in order to promote the general welfare
[185]
 and the State's inherent power to prohibit all that is hurtful to the comfort, safety, and welfare of society,
[186]
 and flows from the recognition that 
salus populi est suprema lex
.
[187]
 It is described as the most essential, insistent and illimitable
[188]
 of the powers of the State. It is co-existent with the concept of the State and is the very foundation and one of its cornerstones,
[189]
 and therefore even precedes the written Constitution.
                
1. 
    
Enactment of education laws is an exercise of police power
    
 
The State has a "high responsibility for [the] education of its citizens"
[190]
 and has an interest in prescribing regulations to promote the education, and consequently, the general welfare of the people.
[191]
 The regulation or administration of educational institutions, especially on the tertiary level, is invested with public interest.
[192]
 Thus, the enactment of education laws, implementing rules and regulations and issuances of government agencies is an exercise of the State's police power.
[193]
As a professional educational program, legal education properly falls within the supervisory and regulatory competency of the State. The legislative history of the Philippine legal educational system earlier recounted evinces that the State, through statutes enacted by the Congress and administrative regulations issued by the Executive, consistently exercises police power over legal education.
The exercise of such police power, however, is not absolute.
                
2. 
    
Supervisory and regulatory exercise, not control
    
 
The 1935
[194]
 and 1973
[195]
 Constitutions plainly provide that all educational institutions shall be under the supervision of and subject to regulation by the State. These reflect in express terms the police power already inherently possessed by the State. Making express an already inherent power is not a superfluous exercise, but is rather consequential in case of conflict between express powers. As elucidated in 
Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities
:
[196]
In this connection we do not share the belief that [now Article XIV, Section 4(1)] has added new power to what the State inherently possesses by virtue of the police power. An express power is necessarily more extensive than a mere implied power. For instance, if there is conflict between an express individual right and the express power to control private education it cannot off-hand be said that the latter must yield to the former - conflict of two express powers. But if the power to control education is merely implied from the police power, it is feasible to uphold the express individual right[.] x x x
The 1987 Constitution under Section 4(1), Article XIV, even when expressly recognizing the complementary roles played by the public and private schools in education, reiterated that these educational institutions are subject to State supervision and regulation, thus:
SEC. 4.(1) The State recognizes the complementary roles of 
public and private institutions in the educational system
 and shall 
exercise reasonable supervision and regulation of all educational institutions
. (Emphasis supplied)
As much as possible, the words of the Constitution are understood in the sense they have in common use. What it says according to the text of the provision to be construed compels acceptance and negates the power of the courts to alter it, based on the postulate that the framers and the people mean what they say.
[197]
As worded, the Constitution recognizes that the role of public and private schools in education is complementary in relation to each other, and primordial in relation to the State as the latter is only empowered to supervise and regulate. The exercise of police power in relation to education must be compliant with the normative content of Section 4(1), Article XIV of the 1987 Constitution.
[198]
 The exercise of police power over education must merely be supervisory and regulatory.
The State's supervisory and regulatory power is an auxiliary power in relation to educational institutions, be it a basic, secondary or higher education. This must necessarily be so since the right and duty to educate, being part and parcel of youth-rearing, do not inure to the State at the first instance. Rather, it belongs essentially and naturally to the parents,
[199]
 which right and duty they surrender by delegation to the educational institutions. As held in 
Samahan ng mga Progresibong Kabataan (SPARK) v. Quezon City
,
[200]
 the right and duty of parents to rear their children being a natural and primary right connotes the parents' superior right over the State in the upbringing of their children. The responsibility to educate lies with the parents and guardians as an inherent right,
[201]
 over which the State assumes a supportive role.
[202]
 Withholding from the State the unqualified power to control education also serves a practical purpose - it allows for a degree of flexibility and diversity essential to the very reason of education to rear socially responsible and morally upright youth and to enable them, also, to come in contact with challenging ideas.
In this sense, when the Constitution gives the State supervisory power, it is understood that what it enjoys is a supportive power, that is, the power of oversight
[203]
 over all educational institutions. It includes the authority to check, but not to interfere.
In addition to supervision, educational institutions are likewise made subject to State regulation. Dispensing a regulatory function means imposing requirements, setting conditions, prescribing restrictions, and ensuring compliance. In this regard, the political departments are vested with ample authority to set 
minimum standards
 to be met by all educational institutions.
[204]
Starkly withheld from the State is the power to control educational institutions. Consequently, in no way should supervision and regulation be equated to State control. It is interesting to note that even when a suggestion had been made during the drafting of the 1935 Constitution that educational institutions should be made "subject to the laws of the State," the proponent of the amendment had no totalitarian intentions,
[205]
 and the proposal was not meant to curtail the liberty of teaching,
[206]
 thus:
I think it only insures the efficient functioning of educational work and does not limit liberty of administrators of schools. The gentleman will notice that my amendment does not tend to curtail which he used in asking the question [sic]. 
I want the power of the State to be supervisory as supervision in educational parlance should be of the constructive type in the matter of help rather than obstruction.
[207]
 (Emphasis supplied)                
3. 
    
Reasonable exercise
    
 
To be valid, the supervision and regulation of legal education as an exercise of police power must be reasonable and not repugnant to the Constitution.
[208]
As held in 
Social Justice Society v. Atienza, Jr.
,
[209]
 the exercise of police power, in order to be valid, must be compliant with substantive due process:
[T]he State, x x x may be considered as having properly exercised [its] police power only if the following requisites are met: (1) the 
interests of the public generally
, as distinguished from those of a particular class, require its exercise[;] and (2) the means employed are 
reasonably necessary
 for the accomplishment of the purpose and not unduly oppressive upon individuals. In short, there must be a 
concurrence of a lawful subject and a lawful method
. (Emphases supplied)
In 
Philippine Association of Service Exporters, Inc. v. Drilon
,
[210]
 the Court held that:
Notwithstanding its. extensive sweep, police power is not without its own limitations. For all its awesome consequences, 
it may not be exercised arbitrarily or unreasonably
. Otherwise, and in that event, it defeats the purpose for which it is exercised, that is, to advance the public good. (Emphasis supplied)
Obviating any inference that the power to regulate means the power to control, the 1987 Constitution added the word "reasonable" before the phrase supervision and regulation.
The import of the word "reasonable" was elaborated in 
Council of Teachers
,
[211]
 as follows:
x x x Section 4(1) was a provision added by the Framers to crystallize the State's recognition of the importance of the role that the private sector plays in the quality of the Philippine education system. Despite this recognition, the Framers added the second portion of Section 4[1] to emphasize that the State, in the exercise of its police power, still possesses the power of supervision over private schools. The Framers were explicit, however, that this supervision refers to 
external governance
, as opposed to 
internal governance
 which was reserved to the respective school boards, thus:
Madam President, Section 2(b) introduces four changes: one, the addition of the word "reasonable" before the phrase "supervision and regulation"; two, the addition of the word "quality" before the word "education"; three, the change of the wordings in the 1973 Constitution referring to a system of education, requiring the same to be relevant to the goals of national development, to the present expression of "relevant to the needs of the people and society"; and four, the explanation of the meaning of the expression "integrated system of education" by defining the same as the recognition and strengthening of the complementary roles of public and private educational institutions as separate but integral parts of the total Philippine educational system.
When we speak of State supervision and regulation, we refer to the external governance of educational institutions
, particularly private educational institutions as distinguished from the internal governance by their respective boards of directors or trustees and their administrative officials. Even without a provision on external governance, the State would still have the inherent right to regulate educational institutions through the exercise of its police power. We have thought it advisable to restate the supervisory and regulatory functions of the State provided in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions with the addition of the word "reasonable." We found it necessary to add the word "reasonable" because of an 
obiter dictum
 of our Supreme Court in a decision in the case of 
Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities vs. The Secretary of Education and the Board of Textbooks
 in 1955. In that case, the court said, and I quote:
It is enough to point out that local educators and writers think the Constitution provides for control of education by the State.
The Solicitor General cites many authorities to show that the power to regulate means power to control, and quotes from the proceedings of the Constitutional Convention to prove that State control of private education was intended by organic law.
The addition, therefore, of the word 'reasonable' is meant to underscore the sense of the committee, that when the Constitution speaks of State supervision and regulation, it does not in any way mean control. We refer only to the power of the State to provide regulations and to see to it that these regulations are duly followed and implemented.
 
It does not include the right to manage, dictate, overrule and prohibit. Therefore, it does not include the right to dominate.
 (Emphases in the original; underscoring supplied)
The addition of the word "reasonable" did not change the texture of police power that the State exercises over education. It merely emphasized that State supervision and regulation of legal education cannot amount to control.
                
4. 
    
Academic freedom
    
 
Fundamental in constitutional construction is that the Constitution is to be interpreted as a whole, and that all provisions bearing upon a particular subject are to be brought into view and to be so interpreted as to effectuate the purposes of the Constitution.
[212]
Accordingly, the reasonable supervision and regulation clause is not a stand-alone provision, but must be read in conjunction with the other Constitutional provisions relating to education which include, in particular, the clause on academic freedom.
Section 5(2), Article XIV of the 1987 Constitution, provides:
(2) Academic freedom shall be enjoyed in all institutions of higher learning.
This guarantee is not peculiar to the 1987 Constitution. A similarÂ· provision was found in the 1973 Constitution providing that: "All institutions of higher learning shall enjoy academic freedom."
[213]
 Both the 1973 and 1987 Constitutions provide for a broader scope of academic freedom compared to the 1935 Constitution which limits the guarantee of academic freedom only to universities of higher learning established by the State.
[214]
In fact, academic freedom is not a novel concept. This can be traced to the freedom of intellectual inquiry championed by Socrates, lost and replaced by thought control during the time of Inquisition, until the movement back to intellectual liberty beginning the 16
th
 century, most particularly flourishing in German universities.
[215]
Academic freedom has traditionally been associated as a narrow aspect of the broader area of freedom of thought, speech, expression and the press. It has been identified with the individual autonomy of educators to "investigate, pursue, [and] discuss free from internal and external interference or pressure."
[216]
 Thus, academic freedom of faculty members, professors, researchers, or administrators is defended based on the freedom of speech and press.
[217]
Academic freedom is enjoyed not only by members of the faculty, but also by the students themselves, as affirmed in 
Ateneo de Manila University v. Judge Capulong
:
[218]
x x x. After protracted debate and ringing speeches, the final version which was none too different from the way it was couched in the previous two (2) Constitutions, as found in Article XIV, Section 5(2) states: "Academic freedom shall be enjoyed in all institutions of higher learning." In anticipation of the question as to whether and what aspects of academic freedom are included herein, ConCom Commissioner Adolfo S. Azcuna explained: "Since academic freedom is a dynamic concept, we want to expand the frontiers of freedom, especially in education, therefore, we shall leave it to the courts to develop further the parameters of academic freedom."
More to the point, Commissioner Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon asked: "When we speak of the sentence 'academic freedom shall be enjoyed in all institutions of higher learning,' do we mean that academic freedom shall be enjoyed by the institution itself?" Azcuna replied: "Not only that, it also includes x x x" Gascon finished off the broken thought, "the faculty and the students." Azcuna replied: "Yes."
Jurisprudence has so far understood academic freedom of the students as the latter's right to enjoy in school the guarantees of the Bill of Rights. For instance, in 
Villar v. Technological Institute of the Philippines
[219]
 and in 
Non v. Dames II
,
[220]
 it was held that academic standards cannot be used to discriminate against students who exercise their rights to peaceable assembly and free speech, in 
Malabanan v. Ramento
,
[221]
 it was ruled that the punishment must be commensurate with the offense, and in 
Guzman v. National University
,
[222]
 which affirmed the student's right to due process.
Apart from the academic freedom of teachers and students, the academic freedom of the institution itself is recognized and constitutionally guaranteed.
The landmark case of 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
[223]
 elucidates how academic freedom is enjoyed by institutions of higher learning:
[I]t is to be noted that the reference is to the "institutions of higher learning" as the recipients of this boon. It would follow then that the school or college itself is possessed of such a right. 
It decides for itself its aims and objectives and how best to attain them. It is free from outside coercion or interference save possibly when the overriding public welfare calls for some restraint. It has a wide sphere of autonomy certainly extending to the choice of students.
 This constitutional provision is not to be construed in a niggardly manner or in a grudging fashion. That would be to frustrate its purpose, nullify its intent. Former President Vicente G. Sinco of the University of the Philippines, in his Philippine Political Law, is similarly of the view that it "definitely grants the right of academic freedom to the university as an institution as distinguished from the academic freedom of a university professor." He cited the following from Dr. Marcel Bouchard, Rector of the University of Dijon, France, President of the conference of rectors and vice-chancellors of European universities: "It is a well-established fact, and yet one which sometimes tends to be obscured in discussions of the problems of freedom, that the collective liberty of an organization is by no means the same thing as the freedom of the individual members within it; in fact, the two kinds of freedom are not even necessarily connected. In considering the problems of academic freedom one must distinguish, therefore, between the autonomy of the university, as a corporate body, and the freedom of the individual university teacher." Also: To clarify further the distinction between the freedom of the university and that of the individual scholar, he says: The personal aspect of freedom consists in the right of each university teacher - recognized and effectively guaranteed by society - to seek and express the truth as he personally sees it, both in his academic work and in his capacity as a private citizen. Thus the status of the individual university teacher is at least as important, in considering academic freedom, as the status of the institutions to which they belong and through which they disseminate their learning. (Internal citations omitted; emphasis supplied)
Garcia
 also enumerated the internal conditions for institutional academic freedom, that is, the academic staff should have 
de facto
 control over: (a) the admission and examination of students; (b) the curricula for courses of study; (c) the appointment and tenure of office of academic staff; and (d) the allocation of income among the different categories of expenditure.
[224]
Reference was also made to the influential language of Justice Frankfurter's concurring opinion in 
Sweezy v. New Hampshire
,
[225]
 describing it as the "business of the university" to provide a conducive atmosphere for speculation, experimentation, and creation where the four essential freedoms of the university prevail: the right of the university to determine for itself on academic grounds (a) who may teach; (b) what may be taught; (c) how it shall be taught; and (d) who may be admitted to study.
                
4(a).
    
State's supervisory and regulatory power over legal education in relation to academic freedom
    
 
The rule is that institutions of higher learning enjoy ample discretion to decide for itself who may teach, what may be taught, how it shall be taught and who to admit, being part of their academic freedom. The State, in the exercise of its reasonable supervision and regulation over education, can only impose minimum regulations.
At its most elementary, the power to supervise and regulate shall not be construed as stifling academic freedom in institutions of higher learning. This must necessarily be so since institutions of higher learning are not mere walls within which to teach; rather, it is a place where research, experiment, critical thinking, and exchanges are secured. Any form of State control, even at its most benign and disguised as regulatory, cannot therefore derogate the academic freedom guaranteed to higher educational institutions. In fact, this non-intrusive relation between the State and higher educational institutions is maintained even when the Constitution itself prescribes certain educational "thrusts" or directions.
[226]
This attitude of non-interference is not lost in jurisprudence. To cite an example, due regard for institutional academic freedom versus State interference was recognized in 
Lupangco v. Court of Appeals
,
[227]
 the commendable purpose of the Philippine Regulation Commission of ensuring the integrity of the examination notwithstanding:
Another evident objection to Resolution No. 105 is that it violates the academic freedom of the schools concerned. Respondent PRC cannot interfere with the conduct of review that review schools and centers believe would best enable their enrolees to meet the standards required before becoming a full-[f]ledged public accountant. Unless the means or methods of instruction are clearly found to be inefficient, impractical, or riddled with corruption
, review schools and centers may not be stopped from helping out their students. x x x (Emphasis supplied)
Similarly, in 
University of the Philippines v. Civil Service Commission
,
[228]
 the Court upheld the university's academic freedom to choose who should teach and held that the Civil Service Commission had no authority to dictate to the university the outright dismissal of its personnel. Nothing short of marked arbitrariness,
[229]
 or grave abuse of discretion
[230]
 on the part of the schools, or overriding public welfare
[231]
 can therefore justify State interference with the academic judgment of higher educational institutions. As held in 
Ateneo de Manila University v. Judge Capulong
,
[232]
 "[a]s corporate entities, educational institutions of higher learning are inherently endowed with the right to establish their 
policies, academic and otherwise
, unhampered by external controls or pressure."
5. Right to education
Apart from the perspective of academic freedom, the reasonable supervision and regulation clause is also to be viewed together with the right to education. The 1987 Constitution speaks quite elaborately on the right to education. Section 1, Article XIV provides:
SEC. 1. The State shall protect and promote the right of all citizens to quality education at all levels and shall take appropriate steps to make such education accessible to all.
The normative elements of the general right to education under Section 1, Article XIV, are (1) to protect and promote quality education; and (2) to take appropriate steps towards making such quality education accessible.
"Quality" education is statutorily defined as the appropriateness, relevance and excellence of the education given to meet the needs and aspirations of the individual and society.
[233]
In order to protect and promote quality education, the political departments are vested with the ample authority to set minimum standards to be met by all educational institutions. This authority should be exercised within the parameters of reasonable supervision and regulation. As elucidated in 
Council of Teachers
:
[234]
While the Constitution indeed mandates the State to provide quality education, 
the determination of what constitutes quality education is best left with the political departments who have the necessary knowledge, expertise, and resources to determine the same
. The deliberations of the Constitutional Commission again are very instructive:
Now, Madam President, 
we have added the word "quality" before "education" to send appropriate signals to the government that, 
in the exercise of its supervisory and regulatory powers, it should first set satisfactory minimum requirements in all areas curriculum, faculty, internal administration, library, laboratory class and other facilities, et cetera, and it should see to it that satisfactory minimum requirements are met by all educational institutions, both public and private
.
When we speak of quality education we have in mind such matters, among others, as curriculum development, development of learning resources and instructional materials, upgrading of library and laboratory facilities, innovations in educational technology and teaching methodologies, improvement of research quality, and others.
 Here and in many other provisions on education, the principal focus of attention and concern is the students. I would like to say that in my view there is a slogan when we speak of quality of education that I feel we should be aware of, which is, "Better than ever is not enough." In other words, even if the quality of education is good now, we should attempt to keep on improving it. (Emphases and underscoring supplied)
On the other hand, "accessible" education means equal opportunities to education regardless of social and economic differences. The phrase "shall take appropriate steps" signifies that the State may adopt varied approaches in the delivery of education that are relevant and responsive to the needs of the people and the society. This is why, towards this end, the State shall:
(1)
 Establish, maintain, and support a complete, adequate, and integrated system of 
education relevant to the needs of the people and society
;
(2) 
Establish and maintain a system of 
free public education in the elementary and high school levels
. Without limiting the natural right of parents to rear their children, elementary education is compulsory for all children of school age;
(3) 
Establish and maintain a 
system of scholarship grants, student loan programs, subsidies, and other incentives
 which shall be available to deserving students in both public and private schools, especially to the underprivileged;
(4)
 
Encourage 
non-formal, informal, and indigenous learning systems, as well as self-learning, independent, and out-of-school study programs
 particularly those that respond to community needs; and
(5)
 Provide 
adult citizens, the disabled, and out-of-school youth
 with training in civics, vocational efficiency, and other skills.
[235]
 (Emphases supplied)
The deliberations of the framers in this regard are instructive:
MR. GASCON: When we speak of education as a right, what we would like to emphasize is that 
education should be equally accessible to all regardless of social and economic differences. So we go into the issue of providing opportunities to such an education
, recognizing that there are limitations imposed on those who come from the poorer social classes because of their inability to continue education.
[236]
 x x x (Emphasis supplied)
And further, as follows:
This is why 
when we speak of education as a right, it means very clearly that education should be accessible to all, regardless of social and economic differences, meaning, educational opportunities should be provided through a system of free education, at least, up to the secondary level. And recognizing the limits of our financial resources, tertiary education should still be afforded and provided availability to those who are poor and deserving
. That is why when we say that education is a right, it imposes a correlative duty on the part of the State to provide it to the citizens. Making it a right shows that education is recognized as an important function of the State. Education is not merely a social service to be provided by the State. The proposed provision recognizes that a right to education is a right to acquire a decent standard of living, and that, therefore, the State cannot deprive anyone of this right in the same manner that the right to life, the right to liberty and property cannot be taken away without due process of law.
[237]
 (Emphasis supplied)
The element of accessibility under the Constitution, thus, pertains to both the elimination of discrimination especially against disadvantaged groups and to the financial duty of the State for, after all, the right to education is part and parcel of social justice. The objective is to make quality education accessible by appropriate means.
Apart from the Constitution, the right to education is also recognized in international human rights law under various instruments to which the Philippines is a state signatory and to which it is concomitantly bound.
For instance, Article 13(2)
[238]
 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) recognizes the right to receive an education with the following interrelated and essential features; (a) availability; (b) accessibility; (c) acceptability; and (d) adaptability.
[239]
In particular, accessibility is understood as giving everyone, without discrimination, access to educational institutions and programs. Accessibility has three overlapping dimensions:
(1)
 Non-discrimination - education must be accessible to all, especially the most vulnerable groups, in law and fact, without discrimination on any of the prohibited grounds x x x;
(2)
 
Physical accessibility - education has to be within safe physical reach, either by attendance at some reasonably convenient geographic location ([
e.g.
] a neighborhood school) or [
via
] modern technology ([
e.g.
] access to a "distance learning" programme); [and]
(3)
 Economic accessibility - education has to be affordable to all. This dimension of accessibility is subject to the differential wording of [A]rticle 13(2) in relation to primary, secondary and higher education: whereas primary education shall be available "free to all", States parties are required to progressively introduce free secondary and higher education[.]
[240]
Pertinent to higher education, the elements of quality and accessibility should also be present as the Constitution provides that these elements should be protected and promoted in all educational institutions.
Nevertheless, the right to receive higher education is not absolute.
                
5(a).
    
Right to education is subject to fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements
    
 
Article 26(1)
[241]
 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides that "[t]echnical and professional education shall be made generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit[,]" while the ICESCR provides that "[h]igher education shall be made equally accessible to all, on the basis of capacity, by every appropriate means, and in particular by the progressive introduction of free education[.]"
[242]
 Thus, higher education is not to be generally available, but accessible only on the basis of capacity.
[243]
 The capacity of individuals should be assessed by reference to all their relevant expertise and experience.
[244]
The right to receive higher education must further be read in conjunction with the right of every citizen to select a profession or course of study guaranteed under the Constitution. In this regard, the provisions of the 1987 Constitution under Section 5(3), Article XIV are more exacting:
SEC. 5. x x x
x x x x
(3) Every citizen has a right to select a profession or course of study, subject to fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements.
There is uniformity in jurisprudence holding that the authority to set the admission and academic requirements used to assess the merit and capacity of the individual to be admitted and retained in higher educational institutions lie with the institutions themselves in the exercise of their academic freedom.
In 
Ateneo de Manila University v. Judge Capulong
,
[245]
 the Court ruled:
Since 
Garcia v. Loyola School of Theology
, we have consistently upheld the salutary proposition that 
admission to an institution of higher learning is discretionary upon a school, the same being a privilege on the part of the student rather than a right. While under the Education Act of 1982, students have a right "to freely choose their field of study, subject to existing curricula and to continue their course therein up to graduation," such right is subject, as all rights are, to the established academic and disciplinary standards laid down by the academic institution.
"For private schools have the right to establish reasonable rules and regulations for the admission, discipline and promotion of students. This right x x x extends as well to parents x x x as parents are under a social and moral (if not legal) obligation, individually and collectively, to assist and cooperate with the schools."
Such rules are "incident to the very object of incorporation and indispensable to the successful management of the college. The rules may include those governing student discipline." Going a step further, the establishment of rules governing university-student relations, particularly those pertaining to student discipline, may be regarded as vital, not merely to the smooth and efficient operation of the institution, but to its very survival.
Within memory of the current generation is the eruption of militancy in the academic groves as collectively, the students demanded and plucked for themselves from the panoply of academic freedom their own rights encapsulized under the rubric of "right to education" forgetting that, in Hohfeldian terms, they have a concomitant duty, and that is, their 
duty to learn under the rules laid down by the school
. (Citation in the original omitted; emphases supplied)
In 
Villar v. Technological Institute of the Philippines
,
[246]
 the Court similarly held:
x x x x
2. What cannot be stressed too sufficiently is that among the most important social, economic, and cultural rights is the right to education not only in the elementary and high school grades but also on the college level. The constitutional provision as to the State maintaining "a system of free public elementary education and, in areas where finances permit, establish and maintain a system of free public education" up to the high school level does not 
per se
 exclude the exercise of that right in colleges and universities. It is only at the most a reflection of the lack of sufficient funds for such a duty to be obligatory in the case of students in the colleges and universities. 
As far as the right itself is concerned, not the effectiveness of the exercise of such right because of the lack of funds, Article 26 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides: "Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages. Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and professional education shall be made generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit."
3. It is quite clear that 
while the right to college education is included in the social economic, and cultural rights, it is equally manifest that the obligation imposed on the State is not categorical, the phrase used being "generally available" and higher education, while being "equally accessible to all should be on the basis of merit." To that extent, therefore, there is justification for excluding three of the aforementioned petitioners because of their marked academic deficiency.
4. 
The academic freedom enjoyed by "institutions of higher learning" includes the right to set academic standards to determine under what circumstances failing grades suffice for the expulsion of students.
 Once it has done so, however, that standard should be followed meticulously. It cannot be utilized to discriminate against those students who exercise their constitutional rights to peaceable assembly and free speech. If it does so, then there is a legitimate grievance by the students thus prejudiced, their right to the equal protection clause being disregarded. (Emphases supplied)
Likewise, in 
Calawag
:
[247]
Lastly, the right to education invoked by Calawag cannot be made the basis for issuing a writ of preliminary mandatory injunction. In 
Department of Education, Culture and Sports v. San Diego
, we held that the right to education is not absolute. Section 5(e), Article XIV of the Constitution provides that "[e]very citizen has a right to select a profession or course of study, subject to fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements." 
The thesis requirement and the compliance with the procedures leading to it, are part of the reasonable academic requirements a person desiring to complete a course of study would have to comply with.
 (Citation in the original omitted; emphasis supplied)
The deliberations of the framers on the qualifications to the right to education are also illuminating:
MR. NOLLEDO: Thank you, Madam President. Before I ask questions directed to the chairman and members of the committee, I would like to warmly congratulate them for a job well-done. The committee report to my mind, Madam President, is excellent and I hope it will not, in the course of amendments, suffer from adulteration. With respect to page 1, lines 12-13: "Education is the right of every citizen of the Philippines," I agree with this statement, but when we talk of the right, I understand from the chairman that it is compellable and from Commissioner Guingona, that it is enforceable in court. 
Suppose a student of a private school is not allowed to enroll by reason of misconduct or that his stay in the school is considered by the administration of that school to be undesirable, does he have a right to enforce his right to education under this situation?
MR. GUINGONA: Madam President, 
the right to education, like any other right, is not absolute
. As a matter of fact, Article XXVI of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, when it acknowledges the right to education, also qualifies it when at the end of the provision, it say, "on the basis of merit." Therefore, 
the student may be subject to certain reasonable requirements regarding admission and retention
 and this is so provided in the draft Constitution. We admit even of discrimination. We have accepted this in the Philippines, and I suppose in the United States 
there are schools that can refuse admission to boys because they are supposed to be exclusively for girls. And there are schools that may refuse admission to girls because they are exclusively for boys. There may even be discrimination to accept a student who has a contagious disease on the ground that it would affect the welfare of the other students.
 What I mean is that there could be reasonable qualifications, limitations or restrictions to this right, Madam President.
MR. GASCON: May I add, Madam President. 
MR. NOLLEDO: Yes, the Commissioner may.
MR. GASCON: When we speak of education as a right, what we would like to emphasize is that education should be equally accessible to all regardless of social and economic differences. So we go into the issue of providing opportunities to such an education, recognizing that there are limitations imposed on those who come from the poorer social classes because of their inability to continue education.
However, in the same light, 
this right to education is subject to the right of educational institutions to admit students upon certain conditions such as ability to pay the required entrance examination fee and maintaining a respectable school record. When we speak of this right of schools as far as maintaining a certain degree or quality of students, these conditions must be reasonable and should not be used just to impose certain unfair situations on the students.
MR. GUINGONA: Madam President, may I add.
There is already established jurisprudence about this. In the United States, in the case of [
Lesser
] 
v. Board of Education of New York City
, 239, NYS 2d 776, the court held that the refusal of a school to admit a student who had an average of less than 85 percent which is the requirement for that school was lawful.
In the Philippines, we have the case of 
Padriguilan
 [sic] 
v. Manila Central University
 where refusal to retain the student was because of the alleged deficiency in a major subject and this was upheld by our Supreme Court. There is also the case of 
Garcia v. Loyola School of Theology
, wherein Garcia, a woman, tried to continue studying in this school of theology.
[248]
 (Citation in the original omitted; emphases supplied)
Extant from the foregoing is that while there is a right to quality higher education, such right is principally subject to the broad academic freedom of higher educational institutions to impose fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements. Plainly stated, the right to receive education is not and should not be taken to mean as a right to be admitted to educational institutions.
With the basic postulates that jurisdiction over legal education belongs primarily and directly to the political departments, and that the exercise of such police power must be in the context of reasonable supervision and regulation, and must be consistent with academic freedom and the right to education, the Court now proceeds to address whether the assailed provisions of R.A. No. 7662 and the corresponding LEB issuances fall within, the constitutionally-permissible supervision and regulation of legal education.
C.
LEB's Powers Under R.A. No. 7662 
vis-a-vis
 the
 Court's Jurisdiction Under Article VIII, Section 
5(5) of the Constitution
                
1. 
    
Section 3(a)(2) on increasing awareness among members of the legal profession
    
 
One of the general objectives of legal education under Section 3(a)(2) of R.A. No. 7662 is to "increase awareness among 
members of the legal profession
 of the needs of the poor, deprived and oppressed sectors of society[.]" This objective is reiterated by the LEB in LEBMO No. 1-2011, Section 7, Article II, as follows:
SEC. 7. (Section 3 of the law) General and Specific Objectives of Legal Education.
a) Legal education in the Philippines is geared to attain the following objectives:
x x x x
(2) to increase awareness among 
members of the legal profession of the needs of the poor, deprived and oppressed sectors of society[.]
 (Emphasis supplied)
The plain language of Section 3(a)(2) of R.A. No. 7662 and Section 7(2) of LEBMO No. 1-2011 are clear and need no further interpretation. This provision goes beyond the scope of R.A. No. 7662, 
i.e.
, improvement of the quality of legal education, and, instead delves into the training of those who are already members of the bar. Likewise, this objective is a direct encroachment on the power of the Court to promulgate rules concerning the practice of law and legal assistance to the underprivileged and should, thus, be voided on this ground. As aptly observed by the CLEBM and which the Court had approved:
In the same vein Section 3 provides as one of the objectives of legal education increasing "awareness among members of the legal profession of the needs of the poor, deprived and oppressed sectors of the society." Such objective should not find a place in the law that primarily aims to upgrade the standard of schools of law as they perform the task of educating aspiring lawyers. Section 5, paragraph 5 of Article VIII of the Constitution also provides that the Supreme Court shall have the power to promulgate rules on "legal assistance to the underprivileged" and hence, implementation of [R.A. No. 7662] might give rise to infringement of a constitutionally mandated power.
[249]
                
2.
    
Section 2, par. 2 and Section 7(g) on legal apprenticeship and law practice internship as a requirement for taking the bar
    
 
Towards the end of uplifting the standards of legal education, Section 2, par. 2 of R.A. No. 7662 mandates the State to (1) undertake appropriate reforms in the legal education system; (2) require proper selection of law students; (3) maintain quality among law schools; and (4) 
require legal apprenticeship
 and continuing legal education.
Pursuant to this policy, Section 7(g) of R.A. No. 7662 grants LEB the power to establish a law practice internship as a requirement for taking the bar examinations:
SEC. 7. Powers and Functions. - x x x x 
x x x x
(g) 
to establish a law practice internship as a requirement for taking the Bar
, which a law student shall undergo with any duly accredited private or public law office or firm or legal assistance group anytime during the law course for a specific period that the Board may decide, but not to exceed a total of twelve (12) months. For this purpose, the Board shall prescribe the necessary guidelines for such accreditation and the specifications of such internship which shall include the actual work of a new member of the Bar.
This power is mirrored in Section 11(g) of LEBMO No. 1-2011:
SEC. 11. (Section 7 of the law) Powers and Functions. - For the purpose of achieving the objectives of this Act, the Board shall have the following powers and functions:
x x x x
g) 
to establish a law practice internship as a requirement for taking the Bar
 which a law student shall undergo with any duly accredited private or public law office or firm or legal assistance group anytime during the law course for a specific period that the Board may decide, but not to exceed a total of twelve (12)months. For this purpose, the Board shall prescribe the necessary guidelines for such accreditation and the specifications of such internship which shall include the actual work of a new member of the Bar[.]
It is clear from the plain text of Section 7(g) that another requirement, 
i.e.
, completion of a law internship program, is imposed by law for taking the bar examinations. This requirement unduly interferes with the exclusive jurisdiction of the Court to promulgate rules concerning the practice of law and admissions thereto.
The jurisdiction to determine whether an applicant may be allowed to take the bar examinations belongs to the Court. In fact, under the 
whereas
 clauses of the Revised Law Student Practice Rule, the Court now requires the completion of clinical legal education courses, which may be undertaken 
either
 in a law clinic or through an externship, as a prerequisite to take the bar examinations, thus:
Whereas
, to produce practice-ready lawyers, the completion of clinical legal education courses must be a prerequisite to take the bar examinations as provided in Section 5 of Rule 138.
Under Section 7(g), the power of the LEB is no longer confined within the parameters of legal education, but now dabbles on the requisites for admissions to the bar examinations, and consequently, admissions to the bar. This is a direct encroachment upon the Court's exclusive authority to promulgate rules concerning admissions to the bar and should, therefore, be struck down as unconstitutional.
Further, and as will be discussed hereunder, the LEB exercised this power in a manner that forces upon law schools the establishment of a legal apprenticeship program or a legal aid clinic, in violation of the schools' right to determine for themselves their respective curricula.
                
3.
    
Section 2, par. 2 and Section 7(h) on continuing legal education of practicing lawyers
    
 
Petitioners in G.R. No. 230642 argue that the power given to the LEB to adopt a system of continuing legal education implies that the LEB exercises jurisdiction not only over the legal education of those seeking to become lawyers, but also over those who are already lawyers which is a function exclusively belonging to the Court.
[250]
 Respondent, on the other hand, maintains that the LEB's power to adopt a system of continuing legal education is different from the mandatory continuing legal education required of all members of the bar.
[251]
 Respondent explains that the continuing legal education under R.A. No. 7662 is limited to the training of lawyer-professors and not to the practice of the legal profession.
[252]
The questioned power of the LEB to adopt a system of continuing legal education appears in Section 2, par. 2 and Section 7(h) of R.A. No. 7662:
SEC. 2. 
Declaration of Policies
. - x x x 
x x x x
Towards this end, the State shall undertake appropriate reforms in the legal education system, require proper selection of law students, maintain quality among law schools, and require legal apprenticeship and 
continuing legal education
.
x x x x
SEC. 7. 
Powers and Functions
. - x x x 
x x x x
(h) 
to adopt a system of continuing legal education. For this purpose, the [LEB] may provide for the mandatory attendance of practicing lawyers in such courses and for such duration as the [LEB] may deem necessary;
 x x x (Emphases supplied)
This power is likewise reflected in Section 11(h) of LEBMO No. 1-2011, as follows:
SEC. 11. (Section 7 of the law) Powers and Functions. - For the purpose of achieving the objectives of this Act, the Board shall have the following powers and functions:
x x x x
h) to 
adopt a system of continuing legal education. For this purpose, the Board may provide for the mandatory attendance of practicing lawyers in such courses and for such duration as the Board may deem necessary[.]
 x x x (Emphasis supplied)
By its plain language, the clause "continuing legal education" under Section 2, par. 2, and Section 7(h) of R.A. No. 7662 unduly give the LEB the power to supervise the legal education of those who are already members of the bar. Inasmuch as the LEB is authorized to compel 
mandatory attendance of practicing lawyers
 in such courses and for such duration 
as the LEB deems, necessary
, the same encroaches upon the Court's power to promulgate rules concerning the Integrated Bar which includes the education of "lawyer-professors" as teaching of law is practice of law. The mandatory continuing legal education of the members of the bar is, in fact, covered by B.M. No. 850 or the Rules on Mandatory Continuing Legal Education (MCLE) dated August 22, 2000 which requires members of the bar, not otherwise exempt, from completing, every three years, at least 36 hours of continuing legal education activities approved by the MCLE Committee directly supervised by the Court.
As noted by the CLEBM:
Thus, under the declaration of policies in Section 2 of [R.A. No. 7662], the State "shall undertake appropriate reforms in the legal education system, require the proper selection of law students, maintain quality among law schools and require apprenticeship and continuing legal education["]. The concept of continuing legal education encompasses education not only of law students but also of members of the legal profession. Its inclusion in the declaration of policies implies that the [LEB] shall have jurisdiction over the education of persons who have finished the law course and are already licensed to practice law. 
Viewed in the light of Section 5, paragraph 5 of Article VIII of the Constitution that vests the Supreme Court with powers over the Integrated Bar of the Philippines, said portion of Section 2 of [R.A. No. 7662] risks a declaration of constitutional infirmity.
[253]
 (Underscoring supplied)                
4.
    
Section 7(e) on minimum standards for law admission and the PhiLSAT issuances
    
 
Of the several powers of the LEB under R.A. No. 7662, its power to prescribe minimum standards for law admission under Section 7(e) received the strongest objection from the petitioners. Section 7(e), provides:
SEC. 7. 
Powers and Functions
. - x x x 
x x x x
(e) to 
prescribe minimum standards for law admission
 and minimum qualifications and compensation of faculty members; (Emphasis supplied)
Petitioners argue that the power to prescribe the minimum standards for law admission belongs to the Court pursuant to its rule-making power concerning the admission to the practice of law; Thus, Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662 which gives the LEB the power to prescribe the minimum standards for law admission is allegedly unconstitutional as it violates the doctrine of separation of powers. Necessarily, according to the petitioners, the PhiLSAT which was imposed by the LEB pursuant to Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662 is likewise void.
The Court finds no constitutional conflict between its rule-making power and the power of the LEB to prescribe the minimum standards for law admission under Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662. Consequently, the PhiLSAT, which intends to regulate admission to law schools, cannot be voided on this ground.
                
4(a).
    
LEB's power to prescribe minimum standards for "law admission" pertain to admission to legal education and not to the practice of law
    
 
Much of the protestation against the LEB's exercise of the power to prescribe the minimum standards for law admission stems from the interpretation extended to the phrase "law admission." For petitioners, "law admission" pertains to the practice of law, the power over which belongs exclusively to the Court.
The statutory context and the intent of the legislators do not permit such interpretation.
Basic is the rule in statutory construction that every part of the statute must be interpreted with reference to the context, that is, every part must be read together with the other parts, to the end that the general intent of the law is given primacy.
[254]
 As such, a law's clauses and phrases cannot be interpreted as isolated expressions nor read in truncated parts, but must be considered to form a harmonious whole.
[255]
Accordingly, the LEB's power under Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662 to prescribe the minimum standards for law admission should be read with the State policy behind the enactment of R.A. No. 7662 which is fundamentally to uplift the standards of legal education and the law's thrust to undertake reforms in the legal education system. Construing the LEH's power to prescribe the standards for law admission together with the LEB's other powers to administer, supervise, and accredit law schools, leads to the logical interpretation that the law circumscribes the LEB's power to prescribe admission requirements only to those seeking enrollment to a school or college of law and not to the practice of law.
Reference may also be made to DECS Order No. 27-1989, as the immediate precursor of R.A. No. 7662, as to what is sought to be regulated when the law speaks of "law admission" requirements.
Section 1, Article VIII of DECS Order No. 27-1989 is clear that the admission requirement pertains to enrollment in a law course, or law school, or legal education, thus:
Article VIII
Admission
, Residence and Other 
Requirements
SEC. 1. 
No applicant shall be enrolled in the law course unless he complies with specific requirements for admission by the Bureau of Higher Education and the Supreme Court of the Philippines
, for which purpose he must present to the registrar the necessary credentials before the end of the enrollment period. (Emphases supplied)
This contemporary interpretation suffice in itself to hold that the phrase "law admission" pertains to admission to the study of law or to legal education, and not to the practice of law. Further support is nevertheless offered by the exchanges during the Senate interpellations, wherein it was assumed that the phrase "minimum standards for law admission" refers to the requirements that the student must fulfill before being admitted to law school. This assumption was not corrected by the bill's sponsor.
[256]
                
4(b). 
    
Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662 is reasonable supervision and regulation
    
 
Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662, insofar as it gives the LEB the power to prescribe the minimum standards for law admission is faithful to the reasonable supervision and regulation clause. It merely authorizes the LEB to prescribe minimum requirements not amounting to control.
Emphatically, the law allows the LEB to prescribe only the minimum standards and it did not, in any way, impose that the minimum standard for law admission should be by way of an exclusionary and qualifying exam nor did it prevent law schools from imposing their respective admission requirements.
Thus, under LEBMO No. 1-2011, the minimum standards for admission to law schools as implemented by the LEB are: (1) completion of a four-year high school course; and (2) completion of a course for a bachelor's degree in arts or sciences.
[257]
 Again, these requirements are but consistent with the nature of the law course in the Philippines as being both a professional and post-baccalaureate education.
As the facts disclose, however, the LEB later on introduced the PhiLSAT as an additional prerequisite for admission to law school.
                
4(c).
    
Pursuant to Section 7(e), LEB is authorized to administer an aptitude test as a minimum standard for law admission
    
 
Evident from the Senate deliberations that, in prescribing the minimum standards for law admission, 
an aptitude test may be administered by the LEB
 although such is not made mandatory under the law. Thus:
Senator Tolentino: x x x
I will proceed to another point, Mr. President. I have taught law for more than 25 years in private schools and in the University of the Philippines as well. There is one thing I have noticed in all these years of teaching and that is, many students in the law school are not prepared or apt by inclination or by ability to become lawyers. I see that the objectives of the legal education that are provided for in this bill do not provide for some mechanism of choosing people who should take up the law course.
As it is now, because of our democratic principles, anybody who wants to become a lawyer, who can afford the tuition fee, or who has the required preparatory course, can be admitted into the law school. And yet, while studying law, many of these students - I would say there are about 30 or 40 percent of students in private schools - should not be taking up law but some other course because, simply, they do not have the inclination, they do not have the aptitude or the ability to become lawyers.
Can that be provided for in this bill, Madam Sponsor? Would it contravene really our principles of democracy where everybody should be free to take the course that he wants to take? Or should the State be able to determine who should be able or who should be allowed to take a particular course, in this case of law?
Senator Shahani: 
Mr. President, there are those aptitude tests which are being taken when the student is in high school to somehow guide the guidance councilors [sic] into the aptitude of the students. But the talent or the penchant for the legal profession is not one of those subjects specifically measured. I think what is measured really is who is, more or less, talented for an academic education as against a vocational education. But maybe, a new test will have to be designed to really test the aptitude of those who would like to enter the law school.
 x x x
Senator Tolentino: x x x
Many parents want to see their children become lawyers. But they do not consider the aptitude of these children, and they waste money and time in making these children take up law when they really are not suited to the law course. 
My real concern is whether by legislation, we can provide for selection of those who should be allowed to take up law, and not everybody would be allowed to take up law.
 x x x
x x x x
Senator Shahani: 
Mr. President, of course, the right to education is a constitutional right, and I think one cannot just categorically deny a student - especially if he is bright - entrance to a law school. I think I would stand by what I had previously said that an aptitude examination will have to be specially designed.
 It is not in existence yet. x x x
[258]
 (Emphases supplied)
This matter was amplified in second reading:
Senator Angara: x x x
Senator Tolentino asked why there is an omission on the requirements for admission to law school. I think [Senator Shahani] has already answered that, 
that the [LEB] may prescribe an aptitude test for that purpose. Just as in other jurisdictions, they prescribe a law admission test for prospective students of law. I think the board may very well decide to prescribe such a test, although it is not mandatory under this bill
.
[259]
 (Emphasis and underscoring supplied)
The lawmakers, therefore, recognized and intended that the LEB be vested with authority to administer an aptitude test as a minimum standard for law admission. The presumption is that the legislature intended to enact a valid, sensible, and just law and one which operates no further than may be necessary to effectuate the specific purpose of the law.
[260]
 This presumption has not been successfully challenged by petitioners.
It also bears to note that the introduction of a law aptitude examination was actually supported by the Court when it approved the CLEBM's proposed amendment to Section 7(e), as follows:
SEC. 6. Section 7 of the same law is hereby amended to read as follows:
"SEC. 7. 
Power and Functions
. - x x x 
x x x x
d). to prescribe minimum standards for ADMISSION TO LAW SCHOOLS 
INCLUDING A SYSTEM OF LAW APTITUDE EXAMINATION x x x[.]
" (Underscoring supplied)
And further in Bar Matter No. 1161
[261]
 when the Court referred to the LEB the conduct of a proposed law entrance examination.
                
4(d). 
    
PhiLSAT, as an aptitude exam, is reasonably related to the improvement of legal education
    
 
Having settled that the LEB has the power to administer an aptitude test, the next issue to be resolved is whether the exercise of such power, through the PhiLSAT, was reasonable.
Indeed, an administrative regulation is susceptible to attack for unreasonableness. In 
Lupangco v. Court of Appeals
,
[262]
 the Court held:
It is an [axiom] in administrative law that administrative authorities should not act arbitrarily and capriciously in the issuance of rules and regulations. To be valid, such rules and regulations must be reasonable and fairly adapted to secure the end in view. If shown to bear no reasonable relation to the purposes for which they are authorized to be issued, then they must be held to be invalid.
 (Emphasis supplied)
To determine whether the PhiLSAT constitutes a valid exercise of police power, the same test of reasonableness, 
i.e.
, the concurrence of a lawful subject and lawful means, is employed. Petitioners argue that the PhiLSAT is unreasonable because: it is not a conclusive proof of the student's aptitude;
[263]
 it entails unreasonable examination and travel expenses and burdensome documentary requirements;
[264]
 applying for PhiLSAT exemption is inconvenient;
[265]
 it is redundant to existing law school entrance exams;
[266]
 and it is not supported by scientific study.
[267]
Unfortunately, these grounds are not only conclusions of fact which beg the presentation of competent evidence, but also necessarily go into the wisdom of the PhiLSAT which the Court cannot inquire into. The Court's pronouncement as to the reasonableness of the PhiLSAT based on the grounds propounded by petitioners would be an excursion into the policy behind the examinations - a function which is administrative rather than judicial.
Petitioners also argue that there is no reasonable relation between improving the quality of legal education and regulating access thereto. The Court does not agree.
The subject of the PhiLSAT is to improve the quality of legal education. It is indubitable that the State has an interest in prescribing regulations promoting education and thereby protecting the common good. Improvement of the quality of legal education, thus, falls squarely within the scope of police power. The PhiLSAT, as an aptitude test, was the means to protect this interest.
                
4(e). 
    
Tablarin sustained the conduct of an admission test as a legitimate exercise of the State's regulatory power
    
 
Moreover, by case law, the Court already upheld the validity of administering an aptitude test as a reasonable police power measure in the context of admission standards into institutions of higher learning.
In 
Tablarin
, the Court upheld not only the constitutionality of Section 5(a) of R.A. No. 2382, or the Medical Act of 1959, which gave the Board of Medical Education (BME) the power to prescribe requirements for admission to medical schools, but also 
MECS Order No. 52, Series of 1985
 (MECS Order No. 52-1985) issued by the BME which prescribed NMAT.
Using the rational basis test, the Court upheld the constitutionality of the NMAT as follows:
Perhaps the only issue that needs some consideration is 
whether there is some reasonable relation between the prescribing of passing the NMAT as a condition for admission to medical school on the one hand, and the securing of the health and safety of the general community, on the other hand
. This question is perhaps most usefully approached by recalling that the 
regulation of the practice of medicine in all its branches has long been recognized as a reasonable method of protecting the health and safety of the public
. That the power to regulate and control the practice of medicine includes the power to regulate admission to the ranks of those authorized to practice medicine, is also well recognized. Thus, legislation and administrative regulations requiring those who wish to practice medicine first to take and pass medical board examinations have long ago been recognized as valid exercises of governmental power. Similarly, the establishment of minimum medical educational requirements - i.e., the completion of prescribed courses in a recognized medical school - for admission to the medical profession, has also been sustained as a legitimate exercise of the regulatory authority of the state. 
What we have before us in the instant case is closely related; the regulation of access to medical schools.
 MECS Order No. 52, s. 1985, as noted earlier, articulates the rationale of regulation of this type: the improvement of the professional and technical quality of the graduates of medical schools, by upgrading the quality of those admitted to the student body of the medical schools. 
That upgrading is sought by selectivity in the process of admission, selectivity consisting, among other things, of limiting admission to those who exhibit in the required degree the aptitude for medical studies and eventually for medical practice.
 The need to maintain, and the difficulties of maintaining, high standards in our professional schools in general, and medical schools in particular, in the current stage of our social and economic development, are widely known.
We believe that the government is entitled to prescribe an admission test like the NMAT as a means for achieving its stated objective of "upgrading the selection of applicants into [our] medical schools" and of "improv[ing] the quality of medical education, in the country."
 Given the widespread use today of such admission tests in, for instance, medical schools in the United States of America the Medical College Admission Test [MCAT] and quite probably in other countries with far more developed educational resources than our own, and taking into account the failure or inability of the petitioners to even attempt to prove otherwise, 
we are entitled to hold that the NMAT is reasonably related to the securing of the ultimate end of legislation and regulation in this area. That end, it is useful to recall, is the protection of the public from the potentially deadly effects of incompetence and ignorance in those who would undertake to treat our bodies and minds for disease or trauma
.
[268]
 (Emphases supplied)
The Court reached its conclusion that NMAT is a valid exercise of police power because the method employed, 
i.e.
, regulation of admissions to medical education is reasonably related to the subject, 
i.e.
, the protection of the public by ensuring that only those qualified are eventually allowed to practice medicine.
The necessity of State intervention to ensure that the medical profession is not infiltrated by those unqualified to take care of the life and health of patients was likewise the reason why the Court in 
Department of Education, Culture and Sports v. San Diego
[269]
 upheld the "three-flunk" rule in NMAT:
We see no reason why the rationale in the [
TabIarin
] case cannot apply to the case at bar. The issue raised in both cases is the academic preparation of the applicant. This may be gauged at least initially by the admission test and, indeed with more reliability, by the three-flunk rule. 
The latter cannot be regarded any less valid than the former in the regulation of the medical profession.
There is no need to redefine here the police power of the State. Suffice it to repeat that the power is validly exercised if (a) the interests of the public generally, as distinguished from those of a particular class, require the interference of the State, and (b) the means employed are reasonably necessary to the attainment of the object sought to be accomplished and not unduly oppressive upon individuals.
In other words, the proper exercise of the police power requires the concurrence of a lawful subject and a lawful method.
The subject of the challenged regulation is certainly within the ambit of the police power. It is the right and indeed the responsibility of the State to insure that the medical profession is not infiltrated by incompetents to whom patients may unwarily entrust their lives and health.
The method employed by the challenged regulation is not irrelevant to the purpose of the law nor is it arbitrary or oppressive. The three-flunk rule is intended to insulate the medical schools and ultimately the medical profession from the intrusion of those not qualified to be doctors.
 (Emphases supplied)
Tablarin
 recognized that State intervention was necessary, and therefore was allowed, because of the need to meet the goal of promoting public health and safety.
In similar vein, the avowed purpose of the PhiLSAT is to improve the quality of legal education by evaluating and screening applicants to law school. As elucidated, the State has an interest in improving the quality of legal education for the protection of the community at-large, and requiring an entrance test is reasonably related to that interest. In other words, the State has the power and the prerogative to impose a standardized test prior to entering law school, in the same manner and extent that the State can do so in medical school when it prescribed the NMAT.
In all, the Court finds no constitutional conflict between the Court's rule-making power concerning admissions to the practice of law and on the LEB's power to prescribe minimum standards for law admission under Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662.
Further, pursuant to its power under Section 7(e), the Court affirms the LEB's authority to initiate and administer an aptitude test, such as the PhiLSAT, as a minimum standard for law admission. Thus, the PhiLSAT, insofar as it functions as an aptitude exam that measures the academic potential of the examinee to pursue the study of law to the end that the quality of legal education is improved is not 
per se
 unconstitutional.
However, there are certain provisions of the PhiLSAT that render its operation exclusionary, restrictive, and qualifying which is contrary to its design as an aptitude exam meant to be used as a tool that should only help and guide law schools in gauging the aptness of its applicants for the study of law. These provisions effectively and absolutely exclude applicants who failed to pass the PhiLSAT from taking up a course in legal education, thereby restricting and qualifying admissions to law schools. As will be demonstrated, these provisions of the PhiLSAT are unconstitutional for being manifestly violative of the law schools' exercise of academic freedom, specifically the autonomy to determine for itself who it shall allow to be admitted to its law program.
D.
LEB's Powers 
vis-a-vis
 Institutional Academic 
Freedom and the Right to Education
                
1. 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PhiLSAT
    
 
Paragraphs 7, 9, 11, and 15 of LEBMO No. 7-2016, provide:
x x x x
7. Passing Score - The 
cut-off or passing score for the PhiLSAT shall be FIFTY-FIVE PERCENT (55%) correct answers, or such percentile score as may be prescribed by the LEB
.
x x x x
9. Admission Requirement - 
All college graduates or graduating students applying for admission to the basic law course shall be required to pass the PhiLSAT as a requirement for admission to any law school in the Philippines.
 Upon the effectivity of this memorandum order, 
no applicant shall be admitted for enrollment as a first year student in the basic law courses leading to a degree of either Bachelor of Laws or Juris Doctor unless he/she has passed the PhiLSAT taken within 2 years before the start of studies for the basic law course and presents a valid [Certificate of Eligibility] as proof thereof
.
x x x x
11. Institutional Admission Requirements - The PhiLSAT 
shall be without prejudice to the right of a law school in the exercise of its academic freedom to prescribe or impose additional requirements for admission
, such as but not limited to:
A score in the PhiLSAT higher than the cut-off or passing score set by the LEB;
Additional or supplemental admission tests to measure the competencies and/or personality of the applicant; and
Personal interview of the applicant.
x x x x
15. Sanctions - Law schools violating this Memorandum Order shall [be] imposed the 
administrative sanctions
 prescribed in Section 32 of LEBMO No. 2, Series of 2013 
and/or fine
 of up to Ten Thousand Pesos (P10,000) for each infraction. (Emphases supplied)
Without doubt, the above provisions exclude and disqualify those examinees who fail to reach the prescribed passing score from being admitted to any law school in the Philippines. In mandating that only applicants who scored at least 55% correct answers shall be admitted to any law school, the PhiLSAT actually usurps the right and duty of the law school to determine for itself the criteria for the admission of students and thereafter, to apply such criteria on a case-by-case basis. It also mandates law schools to absolutely reject applicants with a grade lower than the prescribed cut-off score and those with expired PhiLSAT eligibility. The token regard for institutional academic freedom comes into play, if at all, only after the applicants had been "pre-selected" without the school's participation. The right of the institutions then are constricted only in providing "additional" admission requirements, admitting of the interpretation that the preference of the school itself is merely secondary or supplemental to that of the State which is antithetical to the very principle of reasonable supervision and regulation.
The law schools are left with absolutely no discretion to choose its students at the first instance and in accordance with its own policies, but are dictated to surrender such discretion in favor of a State-determined pool of applicants, under pain of administrative sanctions and/or payment of fines. Mandating law schools to reject applicants who failed to reach the prescribed PhiLSAT passing score or those with expired PhiLSAT eligibility transfers complete control over admission policies from the law schools to the LEB. As Garcia tritely emphasized: "[c]olleges and universities should [not] be looked upon as public utilities devoid of any discretion as to whom to admit or reject. Education, especially higher education, belongs to a different, and certainly higher category."
[270]
                
1(a).
    
Comparison of PhiLSAT with NMAT and LSAT
    
 
Respondent urges the Court to treat the PhiLSAT in the same manner that the Court treated the NMAT in 
Tablarin
. Petitioners oppose on the ground that the PhiLSAT and the NMAT are different because there is a Constitutional body, 
i.e.
, the Court, tasked to regulate the practice of law while there is none with respect to the practice of medicine.
The Court treats the PhiLSAT differently from the NMAT for the fundamental reason that these aptitude exams operate differently.
For one, how these exams allow the schools to treat the scores therein obtained is different.
While both exams seem to prescribe a "cut-off" score, the NMAT score is evaluated by the medical schools in relation to their own cut-off scores. Unlike the PhiLSAT score, the NMAT score is not the sole determining factor on whether or not an examinee may be admitted to medical school. The NMAT score is only meant to be one of the bases for evaluating applicants for admission to a college of medicine.
Medical schools further enjoy the discretion to determine how much weight should be assigned to an NMAT score relative to the schools' own admissions policy. Different medical schools may therefore set varying acceptable NMAT scores. Different medical schools may likewise assign different values to the NMAT score. This allows medical schools to consider the NMAT score 
along with
 the other credentials of the applicant. The NMAT score does not constrain medical schools to accept pre-selected applicants; it merely provides for a tool to evaluate all applicants.
Obtaining a low NMAT percentile score will not immediately and absolutely disqualify an applicant from being admitted to medical school. Obtaining a high NMAT percentile score only increases an applicant's options for medical schools. Taking the NMAT, thus, expands the applicant's options for medical schools; it does not limit them.
For another, medical schools are not subjected to sanctions in case they decide to admit an applicant pursuant to their own admissions policy. In fact, at some point,
[271]
 there was even no prescribed cut-off percentile score for the NMAT, and instead it was stressed that a student may enroll in any school, college or university upon meeting the latter's specific requirements and reasonable regulations.
[272]
 Also, the issuance of a certificate of eligibility for admission to a college of medicine had been transferred to. the medical schools, thus, rightfully giving the responsibility for and accountability of determining eligibility of students for admission to the medical program to the schools concerned.
[273]
Similar to the NMAT, the Law School Admission Test (LSAT) is only one of the several criteria for evaluation for law school admission. It is just one of the methods that law schools may use to differentiate applicants for law school. The American Bar Association actually allows a law school to use an admission test other than the LSAT and it does not dictate the particular weight that a law school should give to the results of the LSAT in deciding whether to admit an applicant.
[274]
In contrast, the PhiLSAT score itself determines whether an applicant may be admitted to law school or not, the PhiLSAT being strictly a pass or fail exam. It excludes those who failed to reach the prescribed cut-off score from being admitted to any law school. It qualifies admission to law school not otherwise imposed by the schools themselves. The PhiLSAT, as presently crafted, employs a totalitarian scheme in terms of student admissions. This leaves the consequent actions of the applicant-student and the school solely dependent upon the results of the PhiLSAT.
                
1(b).
    
Balancing State interest with institutional academic freedom
      
    
 
Thus far, it is settled that the PhiLSAT, when administered as an aptitude test, is reasonably related to the State's unimpeachable interest in improving the quality of legal education. This aptitude test, however, should not be exclusionary, restrictive, or qualifying as to encroach upon institutional academic freedom. Moreover, in the exercise of their academic freedom to choose who to admit, the law schools should be left with the discretion to determine for themselves how much weight should the results of the PhiLSAT carry in relation to their individual admission policies. At all times, it is understood that the school's exercise of such academic discretion should not be gravely abused, arbitrary, whimsical, or discriminatory.
With the conclusion that the PhiLSAT, when administered as an aptitude test, passes the test of reasonableness, there is no reason to strike down the PhiLSAT in its entirety. Instead, the Court takes a calibrated approach and partially nullifies LEBMO No. 7-2016 insofar as it absolutely prescribes the passing of the PhiLSAT and the taking thereof within two years as a prerequisite for admission to any law school which, on its face, run directly counter to institutional academic freedom. The rest of LEBMO No. 7-2016, being free from any taint of unconstitutionality, should remain in force and effect, especially in view of the separability clause
[275]
 therein contained.
                
1(c).
    
PhiLSAT and the right to education
    
 
Anent the argument that the PhiLSAT transgresses petitioners' right to education and their right to select a profession or course of study, suffice to state that the PhiLSAT is a minimum admission standard that is rationally related to the interest of the State to improve the quality of legal education and, accordingly, to protect the general community. The constitutionality of the PhiLSAT, therefore, cannot be voided on the ground that it violates the right to education as stated under Section 1, Article XIV of the Constitution. The Court's pronouncement in 
Tablarin
[276]
 again resonates with significance:
Turning to Article XIV, Section 1, of the 1987 Constitution, we note that once more, petitioners have failed to demonstrate that the statute and regulation they assail in fact clash with that provision. On the contrary, we may note - x x x - that the statute and the regulation which petitioners attack are in fact designed to promote "quality education" at the level of professional schools. When one reads Section 1 in relation to Section 5(3) of Article XIV, as one must, one cannot but note that the latter phrase of Section 1 is not to be read with absolute literalness. The State is not really enjoined to take appropriate steps to make quality education "accessible to all" who might for any number of reasons wish to enroll in a professional school, but rather merely to make such education accessible to all who qualify under "fair, reasonable and equitable admission and academic requirements." 
2.
    
Other LEB issuances on law admission
    
 
Apart from the PhiLSAT, the LEB also imposed additional requirements for admission to law schools under LEBMO No. 1-2011, specifically:
Article III
Prerequisites and Program Specification
SEC. 15. 
Prerequisites to admission to Law School
. - x x x
x x x x
Where the applicant for admission into a law school is a graduate of a foreign institution or school following a different course and progression of studies, 
the matter shall be referred to the Board that shall determine the eligibility of the candidate for admission to law school
.
SEC. 16. 
Board Prerequisites for Admission to the Ll.B. or J.D. Program
. - The Board shall apply Section 6 of Rule 138 in the following wise: An applicant for admission to the Ll.B. or J.D. program of studies must be a graduate of a bachelor's degree and must have earned 
at least eighteen (18) units in English, six (6) units in Mathematics, and eighteen (18) units of social science subjects
.
SEC. 17. 
Board Prerequisites for Admission to Graduate Programs in Law
. - Without prejudice to other requirements that graduate schools may lay down, 
no applicant shall be admitted for the Master of Laws (Ll.M.) or equivalent master's degree in law or juridical science, without an Ll.B. or a J.D. degree
. Admission of non-Members of the Philippine Bar to the master's degree shall be a matter of academic freedom vested in the graduate school of law. The candidate for the doctorate degree in juridical science, or doctorate in civil law or equivalent doctorate degree must have completed a Master of Laws (Ll.M.) or equivalent degree.
Graduate degree programs in law shall have no bearing on membership or non-membership in the Philippine Bar.
[277]
 (Emphases supplied)
Further, LEBMO No. 1-2011, Article V, provides:
x x x x
SEC. 23. No student who has obtained a general average below 2.5 or 80 in the college course required for admission to legal studies may be admitted to law school. Exceptions may be made by the Dean in exceptionally meritorious cases, after having informed the Board.
[278]
These provisions similarly encroach upon the law school's freedom to determine for itself its admission policies. With regard to foreign students, a law school is completely bereft of the right to determine for itself whether to accept such foreign student or not, as the determination thereof now belongs to the LEB.
Similarly, the requirement that an applicant obtain a specific number of units in English, Mathematics, and Social Science subjects affects a law school's admission policies leaving the latter totally without discretion to admit applicants who are deficient in these subjects or to allow such applicant to complete these requirements at a later time. This requirement also effectively extends the jurisdiction of the LEB to the courses and units to be taken by the applicant in his or her pre-law course. Moreover, such requirement is not to be found under Section 6, Rule 138 of the Rules of Court as this section simply requires only the following from an applicant to the bar exams:
SEC. 6. 
Pre-Law
. - No applicant for admission to the bar examination shall be admitted unless he presents a certificate that he has satisfied the Secretary of Education that, before he began the study of law, he had pursued and satisfactorily completed in an authorized and recognized university or college, requiring for admission thereto the completion of a four-year high school course, 
the course of study prescribed therein for a bachelor's degree in arts or sciences with any of the following subjects as major or field of concentration: political science, logic, english, spanish, history and economics
.
Likewise, in imposing that only those with a basic degree in law may be admitted to graduate programs in law encroaches upon the law school's right to determine who may be admitted. For instance, this requirement effectively nullifies the option of admitting non-law graduates on the basis of relevant professional experience that a law school, pursuant to its own admissions policy, may otherwise have considered.
The required general weighted average in the college course suffers the same infirmity and would have been struck down had Â·it not been expressly repealed by the LEB because of the PhiLSAT.
[279]
                
3.
 Section 7(c) and 7(e) on the minimum qualifications of faculty members
 
The LEB is also empowered under Section 7(c) to set the standards of accreditation taking into account, among others, the "qualifications of the members of the faculty" and under Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662 to prescribe "minimum qualifications and compensation of faculty members[.]"
Relative to the power to prescribe the minimum qualifications of faculty members, LEB prescribes under LEBMO No. 1-2011 the following:
[PART I] 
Article V
Instructional Standards
SEC. 20. The law school shall be headed by a 
properly qualified dean, maintain a corps of professors drawn from the ranks of leading and acknowledged practitioners as well as academics and legal scholars or experts in juridical science[.]
 x x x
x x x x
PART III 
QUALIFICATIONS AND CURRICULUM
Article I 
Faculty Qualifications
SEC. 50. The 
members of the faculty of a law school should, at the very least, possess a L1.B. or a J.D. degree and should be members of the Philippine Bar
. In the exercise of academic freedom, the law school may also ask specialists in various fields of law with other qualifications, provided that they possess relevant doctoral degrees, to teach specific subjects.
Within a period of five (5) years of the promulgation of the present order, members of the faculty of schools of law shall commence their studies in graduate schools of law.
Where a law school offers the J.D. curriculum, a qualified Ll.B. graduate who is a member of the Philippine Bar may be admitted to teach in the J.D. course and may wish to consider the privilege granted under Section 56 hereof.
SEC. 51. 
The dean should have, aside from complying with the requirements above, at least a Master of Laws (Ll.M.) degree or a master's degree in a related field, and should have been a Member of the Bar for at least 5 years prior to his appointment as dean.
SEC. 52. 
The dean of a graduate school of law should possess at least a doctorate degree in law and should be an acknowledged authority in law, as evidenced by publications and membership in learned societies and organizations; members of the faculty of a graduate school of law should possess at least a Master of Laws (Ll.M.) degree or the relevant master's or doctor's degrees in related fields.
Aside from the foregoing, retired justices of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeals, the Sandiganbayan and the Court of Tax Appeals may serve as deans of schools of law, provided that they have had teaching experience as professors of law and provided further that, 
with the approval of the Legal Education Board
, a graduate school of law may accredit their experience in the collegiate appellate courts and the judgments they have penned towards the degree [
ad eundem
] of Master of Laws.
[280]
 (Emphases supplied)
Thus, under LEBMO No. 1-2011, a law faculty member must have an Ll.B or J.D. degree and must, within a period of five years from the promulgation of LEBMO No. 1-2011, or from June 14, 2011 to June 14, 2016, commence studies in graduate school of law.
The mandatory character of the requirement of a master's degree is underscored by the LEB in its 
Resolution No. 2014-02
, a "sequel rule" to Section 50 of LEBMO No. 1-2011, which provides that:
x x x x
Members of the law faculty are required to be holders of the degree of Master of Laws.
 It is the responsibility of the law deans to observe and implement this rule.
The law faculty of all law schools shall have the following percentage of holders of the master of laws degree:
2.1. 
School Year- 2017-2018-20%
2.2. 
School Year- 2018-2019 - 40%
2.3.
 
School Year- 2019-2020-60%
2.4. 
School Year- 2020-2021-80%
In computing the percentage, those who are exempted from the rule shall be included.
Exempted from this requirement of a master's degree in law are the following:
The Incumbent or Retired Members of the:
3.1.
 
Supreme Court;
3.2.
 
Court of Appeals, Sandiganbayan and Court of Tax Appeals;
3.3.
 Secretary of Justice and Under-Secretaries of Justice, Ombudsman, Deputy Ombudsmen, Solicitor General and Assistant Solicitors General
3.4. 
Commissioners of the National Labor Relations Commission who teach Labor Laws;
3.5.
 
Regional Trial Court Judges;
3.6.
 DOJ State and Regional State Prosecutors and Senior Ombudsman Prosecutors who teach Criminal Law and/or Criminal Procedure;
3.7. 
Members of Congress who are lawyers who teach Political Law, Administrative Law, Election Law, Law on Public Officers and other related subjects;
3.8.
 Members of Constitutional Commissions who are Lawyers;
3.9. 
Heads of bureaus who are lawyers who teach the law subjects which their respective bureaus are implementing;
3.10. 
Ambassadors, Ministers and other [D]iplomatic Officers who are lawyers who teach International Law or related subjects;
3.11.
 Those who have been teaching their subjects for 10 years or more upon recommendation of their deans; and
3.12. 
Other lawyers who are considered by the Board to be experts in any field of law provided they teach the subjects of their expertise.
The following are the sanctions for non-compliance with the foregoing rules:
4.1.
 If a law school is non-compliant with these rules for the first time beginning School Year 2017-2018, the Board shall 
downgrade its Recognition status to Permit status
;
4.2.
If a law school under a Permit status should remain nonÂ­-compliant with these rules in succeeding school years, the Board shall 
downgrade the Permit status to Phase-Out status
;
4.3. 
If a law school which is under Phase-Out status remains nonÂ­-compliant with these rules in succeeding school years, the Board shall order its 
closure
 to take effect at the end of the school year.
If a law school under sanction shall become compliant, its Recognition status shall be restored. (Emphases supplied)
x x x x
And under LEBMO No. 2:
SEC. 31. Unfitness to Continue Operating a Law Program. A law school which is operated 
below quality standards of a law school
 is unfit to continue operating a law program.
x x x x
2) A law school is 
substandard
 if the result of the inspection and evaluation of the law school and its facilities by members of the Board or its staff shows that the law school has serious deficiencies including a 
weak faculty
 as indicated, among others, by the fact that 
most of the members are neophytes in the teaching of law[.]
 x x x
x x x x
SEC. 32. The imposable administrative sanctions are the following:
a) Termination of the law program (closing the law school);
b) Phase-out of the law program;
c) Provisional cancellation of the Government Recognition and putting the law program of the substandard law school under Permit Status.
This master of laws degree requirement is reiterated in 
LEBMO No. 17, Series of 2018
 (Supplemental Regulations on the Minimum Academic Requirement of Master of Laws Degree for Deans and Law Professors/Lecturers/Instructors in Law Schools), as follows:
x x x x
B) For Members of the Law Faculty
SEC. 6. For purposes of determining compliance with the 
minimum academic requirement
 of a Ll.M. degree for the members of the law faculty in law schools required under Section 50 of LEBMO No. 1, Series of 2011 and Resolution No. 2014-02, the required percentage of holders of Ll.M. shall be computed based on the aggregate units of all courses/subjects offered during the semester by the law school.
SEC. 7. Within thirty (30) days upon completion the effectivity this of this memorandum [sic], the President of the HEI and the Dean of each law school shall jointly 
submit to the LEB separate certification of the total teaching assignments/load for the 1
st
 Semester and 2
nd
 Semester of the Academic Year 2017-2018 in the prescribed matrix form containing the names of every faculty member, his/her highest academic law degree, qualification for , exemption from the Ll.M. requirement, if applicable, courses/subjects assigned to teach, and academic weight of each course/subject, and a disclosure whether or not the law school is compliant with the prescribed percentage of Ll.M. holders for faculty members
. Thereafter, the same certification shall be submitted for every regular semester not later than 45 days from the start of the semester.
x x x x
SEC. 12. 
Law schools failing to meet the prescribed percentage of its faculty members required to have Ll.M. degrees shall be imposed the appropriate administrative sanction specified under Resolution No. 2014-02.
 (Emphases supplied)
To be sure, under its supervisory and regulatory power, the LEB can prescribe the minimum qualifications of faculty members. This much was affirmed by the Court when it approved the CLEBM's proposal to revise the powers of LEB under R.A. No. 7662, but nevertheless retaining the LEB's power to "provide for minimum qualifications for faculty members of law schools." As worded, the assailed clauses of Section 7(c) and 7(e) insofar as they give LEB the power to prescribe the minimum qualifications of faculty members are in tune with the reasonable supervision and regulation clause and do not infringe upon the academic freedom of law schools.
Moreover, this minimum qualification can be a master of laws degree. In 
University of the East v. Pepanio
,
[281]
 the Court held that the requirement of a masteral degree, albeit for tertiary education teachers, is not unreasonable. Thus:
The requirement of a masteral degree for tertiary education teachers is not unreasonable. The operation of educational institutions involves public interest. The government has a right to ensure that only qualified persons, in possession of sufficient academic knowledge and teaching skills, are allowed to teach in such institutions. Government regulation in this field of human activity is desirable for protecting, not only the students, but the public as well from illÂ­-prepared teachers, who are lacking in the required scientific or technical knowledge. They may be required to take an examination or to possess postgraduate degrees as prerequisite to employment.
 (Emphasis supplied)
This was reiterated in 
Son v. University of Santo Tomas
,
[282]
 as follows:
As early as in 1992, the requirement of a Master's degree in the undergraduate program professor's field of instruction has been in place, through DECS Order 92 (series of 1992, August 10, 1992) or the Revised Manual of Regulations for Private Schools. Article IX, Section 44, paragraph [1(a)] thereof provides that college faculty members must have a master's degree in their field of instruction as a minimum qualification for teaching in a private educational institution and acquiring regular status therein.
DECS Order 92, Series of 1992 was promulgated by the DECS in the exercise of its [rule]-making power as provided for under Section 70 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 232, otherwise known as the Education Act of 1982. As such, it has the force and effect of law. In 
University of the East v. Pepanio
, the requirement of a masteral degree for tertiary education teachers was held to be not unreasonable but rather in accord with the public interest.
x x x x
From a strict legal viewpoint, the parties are both in violation of the law: respondents, for maintaining professors without the mandated masteral degrees, and for petitioners, agreeing to be employed despite knowledge of their lack of the necessary qualifications. Petitioners cannot therefore insist to be employed by UST since they still do not possess the required master's degrees; the fact that UST continues to hire and maintain professors without the necessary master's degrees is not a ground for claiming illegal dismissal, or even reinstatement. As far as the law is concerned, respondents are in violation of the CHED regulations for continuing the practice of hiring unqualified teaching personnel; but the law cannot come to the aid of petitioners on this sole ground. As between the parties herein, they are in 
pari delicto
.
x x x x
The minimum requirement of a master's degree in the undergraduate teacher's field of instruction has been cemented in DECS Order 92, Series of 1992. Both petitioners and respondents have been violating it. The fact that government has not cracked down on violators, or that it chose not to strictly implement the provision, does not erase the violations committed by erring educational institutions, including the parties herein; it simply means that government will not punish these violations for the meantime. The parties cannot escape its concomitant effects, nonetheless. And if respondents knew the overwhelming importance of the said provision and the public interest involved - as they now fiercely advocate to their favor - they should have complied with the same as soon as it was promulgated.
x x x x
In addition, the Court already held in 
Herrera-Manaoisi v. St. Scholastica's College
 that -
Notwithstanding the existence of the SSC Faculty Manual, Manaois still cannot legally acquire a permanent status of employment. Private educational institutions must still supplementarily refer to the prevailing standards, qualifications, and conditions set by the appropriate government agencies (presently the Department of Education, the Commission on Higher Education, and the Teclmical Education and Skills Development Authority). This limitation on the right of private schools, colleges, and universities to select and determine the employment status of their academic personnel has been imposed by the state in view of the public interest nature of educational institutions, so as to ensure the quality and competency of our schools and educators. (Internal citations omitted)
Thus, the masteral degree required of law faculty members and dean, and the doctoral degree required of a dean of a graduate school of law are, in fact, minimum reasonable requirements. However, it is the manner by which the LEB had exercised this power through its various issuances that prove to be unreasonable.
On this point, the 
amicus curiae
, Dean Sedfrey M. Candelaria, while admitting that the masteral degree requirement is a "laudable aim" of the LEB, nevertheless adds that the LEB-imposed period of compliance is unreasonable given the logistical and financial obstacles:
The masteral degree requirement is a laudable aim of LEB, but the possibility of meeting the LEB period of compliance is unreasonable and unrealistic in the light of logistical and financial considerations confronting the deans and professors, including the few law schools offering graduate degrees in law.
To illustrate, to the best of my knowledge there are no more than six (6) graduate schools of law around the country to service potential applicants. Those who have opted for graduate studies in law find it very costly to fly to the venue. While one or two programs may have been delivered outside the provider's home school venue to reach out to graduate students outside the urban centers, pedagogical standards are often compromised in the conduct of the modules. This is even aggravated by the fact that very few applicants can afford to go into full-time graduate studies considering that most deans and professors of law are in law practice. Perhaps, LEB should work in consultation with PALS in designing a cost-effective but efficient delivery system of any graduate program in law, [especially] for deans and law professors.
[283]
Further, the mandatory character of the master of laws degree requirement, under pain of downgrading, phase-out and closure of the law school, is in sharp contrast with the previous requirement under DECS Order No. 27-1989 which merely 
prefer
 faculty members who are holders of a graduate law degree, or its equivalent. The LEB's authority to review the strength or weakness of the faculty on the basis of experience or length of time devoted to teaching violates an institution's right to set its own faculty standards. The LEB also imposed strict reportorial requirements that infringe on the institution's right to select its teachers which, for instance, may be based on expertise even with little teaching experience. Moreover, in case a faculty member seeks to be exempted, he or she must prove to the LEB, and not to the concerned institution, that he or she is an expert in the field, thus, usurping the freedom of the institution to evaluate the qualifications of its own teachers on an individual basis.
Also, while the LEB requires of faculty members and deans to obtain a master of laws degree before they are allowed to teach and administer a law school, respectively, it is ironic that the LEB, under 
Resolution No. 2019-406
, in fact considers the basic law degrees of Ll.B. or J.D. as already equivalent to a doctorate degree in other non-law academic disciplines for purposes of "appointment/promotion, ranking, and compensation."
In this connection, the LEB also prescribes who may or may not be considered as full-time faculty, the classification of the members of their faculty, as well as the faculty load, including the regulation of work hours, all in violation of the academic freedom of law schools. LEBMO No. 2 provides:
SEC. 33. Full-time and Part-time Faculty. There are two general kinds of faculty members, the full-time and part-time faculty members.
a) A full-time faculty member is one:
1) 
Who possesses the 
minimum qualification of a member of the faculty as prescribed in Sections 50 and 51 of LEBMO No. 1
;
2) 
Who devotes 
not less than eight (8) hours of work for the law school
;
3) 
Who has 
no other occupation elsewhere
 requiring regular hours of work, except when permitted by the higher education institution of which the law school is a part; and
4) 
Who is 
not teaching full-time in any other higher education institution
.
b) A part-time faculty member is one who does not meet the qualifications of a full-time professor as enumerated in the preceding number.
SEC. 34. Faculty Classification and Ranking. Members of the faculty may be classified, in the discretion of the higher education institution of which the law school is a part, according to academic proceeding, training and scholarship into Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, and Instructor.
Part-time members of the faculty may be classified as Lecturers, Assistant Professorial Lecturers, Associate Professorial Lecturers and Professorial Lecturers. 
The law schools shall devise their scheme of classification and promotion not inconsistent with these rules.
SEC. 35. Faculty Load. Generally, 
no member of the faculty should teach more than 3 consecutive hours in any subject nor should he or she be loaded with subjects requiring more than three preparations or three different subjects (no matter the number of units per subject) in a day
.
However, under exceptionally meritorious circumstances, the law deans may allow members of the faculty to teach 4 hours a day provided that there is a break of 30 minutes between the first 2 and the last 2 hours. (Emphases supplied)
The LEB is also allowed to revoke permits or recognitions given to law schools when the LEB deems that there is gross incompetence on the part of the dean and the corps of professors or instructors under Section 41.2(d) of LEBMO No. 1-2011, thus:
SEC. 41.2. Permits or recognitions may be revoked, or recognitions reverted to permit status for just causes including but not limited to:
a) fraud or deceit committed by the institution in connection with its application to the Board;
b) the unauthorized operation of a school of law or a branch or an extension of a law school;
c) mismanagement or gross inefficiency in the operation of a law school;
d) gross incompetence on the part of the dean and the corps of professors or instructors;
e) violation of approved standards governing institutional operations, announcements and advertisements;
f) transfer of the school of law to a site or location detrimental to the interests of the students and inimical to the fruitful and promising study of law;
g) repeated failure of discipline on the part of the student body; and
h) other grounds for the closure of schools and academic institutions as provided for in the rules and regulations of the Commission on Higher Education.
[284]
 (Emphasis supplied)
In this regard, the LEB is actually assessing the teaching performance of faculty members and when such is determined by the LEB as constituting gross incompetence, the LEB may mete out penalties, thus, usurping the law school's right to determine for itself the competence of its faculty members.
                
4. 
 
Section 2, par. 2 and Section 7(g) on legal apprenticeship and legal internship
 
While the clause "legal apprenticeship" under Section 2, par. 2 and Section 7(g) on legal internship, as plainly worded, cannot immediately be interpreted as encroaching upon institutional academic freedom, the manner by which LEB exercised this power through several of its issuances undoubtedly show that the LEB controls and dictates upon law schools how such apprenticeship and internship programs should be undertaken.
Pursuant to its power under Section 7(g), the LEB passed 
Resolution No. 2015-08
 (Prescribing the Policy and Rules in the Establishment of a Legal Aid Clinic in Law Schools) wherein it classified legal aid clinics into three types: (1) a legal aid clinic which is an outreach project of a law school; (2) a legal aid clinic which entitles the participating student to curricular credits; and (3) a legal aid clinic that entitles the participating student to avail of the privileges under Rule 138-A of the Rules of Court.
Pertinent to the third type, the LEB requires the law schools to comply with the following rules:
x x x x
b) Implementing Rules
(1)
 
A LAC should be established by the law school.
(2)
 The law school should formulate its Clinical Legal Education Program and submit it to the Legal Education board for its assessment and evaluation.
(3) 
If Legal Education Board finds the Clinical Legal Education Program to be proper and in order it shall endorse it to the Supreme Court for its approval.
(4)
 
Once approved by the Supreme Court, fourth (4
th
) year law students in that law school enrolled in it shall be allowed to practice law on a limited manner pursuant to the provisions of Rule 138-A of the Rules of Court. (Emphasis supplied)
Further, Section 24(c), Article IV of LEBMO No. 2 prescribes the activities that should be included in the law school's apprenticeship program, as follows:
Article IV
Law School: Administrative Matters and Opening of Branches or Extension Classes
SEC. 24. Administrative Matters.
x x x x
c) Apprenticeship Program. The apprenticeship program should be closely supervised by the Dean or a member of the faculty assigned by the Dean to do the task. 
The apprenticeship program should at least include any of the following activities:
1) 
Preparation of legal documents
2) 
Interviewing clients
3) 
Courtroom observation and participation
4) 
Observation and assistance in police investigations, inquests and preliminary investigations
5) 
Legal counseling
6)
Legal assistance to detention prisoners
7) 
For working students, participation in the legal work of the legal section or office of the employer-entity x x x (Emphasis supplied)
Relatedly, Section 59(d) of LEBMO No. 1-2011, provides:
Article IV
Grading System
SEC. 59. Grading System. - The law school, in the exercise of academic freedom, shall devise its own grading system provided that on the first day of classes, the students are apprised of the grading system and 
provided further that the following are observed
:
x x x x
(d) When apprenticeship is required and the student does not complete the mandated number of apprenticeship hours, or the person supervising the apprenticeship program deems the performance of the student unsatisfactory, the dean shall require of the student such number of hours more in apprenticeship as will fulfill the purposes of the apprenticeship program.
[285]
 (Emphasis supplied)
These provisions unduly interfere with the discretion of a law school regarding its curriculum, particularly its apprenticeship program. Plainly, these issuances are beyond mere supervision and regulation.
III.
Conclusion
In general, R.A. No. 7662, as a law meant to uplift the quality of legal education, does not encroach upon the Court's jurisdiction to promulgate rules under Section 5(5), Article VIII of the Constitution. It is well-within the jurisdiction of the State, as an exercise of its inherent police power, to lay down laws relative to legal education, the same being imbued with public interest.
While the Court is undoubtedly an interested stakeholder in legal education, it cannot assume jurisdiction where it has none. Instead, in judicial humility, the Court affirms that the supervision and regulation of legal education is a political exercise, where judges are nevertheless still allowed to participate not as an independent branch of government, but as part of the sovereign people.
Nevertheless, inasmuch as the power to promulgate rules concerning the protection and enforcement of constitutional rights, pleading, practice, and procedure in all courts, the admission to the practice of law, the Integrated Bar, and legal assistance to the underprivileged is settled as belonging exclusively to the Court, certain provisions and clauses of R.A. No. 7662 which, by its plain language and meaning, go beyond legal education and intrude upon the Court's exclusive jurisdiction suffer from patent unconstitutionality and should therefore be struck down.
Moreover, the exercise of the power to supervise and regulate legal education is circumscribed by the normative contents of the Constitution itself, that is, it must be reasonably exercised. Reasonable exercise means that it should not amount to control and that it respects the ConstitutionallyÂ­guaranteed institutional academic freedom and the citizen's right to quality and accessible education. Transgression of these limitations renders the power and the exercise thereof unconstitutional.
Accordingly, the Court recognizes the power of the LEB under its charter to prescribe minimum standards for law admission. The PhiLSAT, when administered as an aptitude test to guide law schools in measuring the applicants' aptness for legal education along with such other admissions policy that the law school may consider, is such minimum standard.
However, the PhiLSAT presently operates not only as a measure of an applicant's aptitude for law school. The PhiLSAT, as a pass or fail exam, dictates upon law schools who among the examinees are to be admitted to any law program. When the PhiLSAT is used to exclude, qualify, and restrict admissions to law schools, as its present design mandates, the PhiLSAT goes beyond mere supervision and regulation, violates institutional academic freedom, becomes unreasonable and therefore, unconstitutional. In striking down these objectionable clauses in the PhiLSAT, the State's inherent power to protect public interest by improving legal education is neither emasculated nor compromised. Rather, the institutional academic freedom of law schools to determine for itself who to admit pursuant to their respective admissions policies is merely protected. In turn, the recognition of academic discretion comes with the inherent limitation that its exercise should not be whimsical, arbitrary, or gravely abused.
In similar vein, certain LEB issuances which exceed the powers granted under its charter should be nullified for being 
ultra vires
.
As in all levels and areas of education, the improvement of legal education indeed deserves serious attention. The parties are at a consensus that legal education should be made relevant and progressive. Reforms for a more responsive legal education are constantly introduced and are evolving. The PhiLSAT, for instance, is not a perfect initiative. Through time and a better cooperation between the LEB and the law schools in the Philippines, a standardized and acceptable law admission examination may be configured. The flaws which the Court assessed to be unconstitutional are meanwhile removed, thereby still allowing the PhiLSAT to develop into maturity. It is, thus, strongly urged that recommendations on how to improve legal education, including tools for screening entrants to law school, reached possibly through consultative summits, be taken in careful consideration in further issuances or legislations.
WHEREFORE
, the petitions are 
PARTLY GRANTED
.
The jurisdiction of the Legal Education Board over legal education is 
UPHELD
.
The Court further declares: 
As 
CONSTITUTIONAL
:
Section 7(c) of R.A. No. 7662 insofar as it gives the Legal Education Board the power to set the standards of accreditation for law schools taking into account, among others, the qualifications of the members of the faculty without encroaching upon the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning; and
Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662 insofar as it gives the Legal Education Board the power to prescribe the minimum requirements for admission to legal education and minimum qualifications of faculty members without encroaching upon the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning.
As 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL
 for encroaching upon the power of the Court:
Section 2, par. 2 of R.A. No. 7662 insofar as it unduly includes "continuing legal education" as an aspect of legal education which is made subject to Executive supervision and control;
Section 3(a)(2) of R.A. No. 7662 and Section 7(2) of LEBMO No. 1-2011 on the objective of legal education to increase awareness among members of the legal profession of the needs of the poor, deprived and oppressed sectors of society;
Section 7(g) of R.A. No. 7662 and Section 11(g) of LEBMO No. 1-2011 insofar as it gives the Legal Education Board the power to establish a law practice internship as a requirement for taking the Bar; and
Section 7(h) of R.A. No. 7662 and Section 11(h) of LEBMO No. 1-2011 insofar as it gives the Legal Education Board the power to adopt a system of mandatory continuing legal education and to provide for the mandatory attendance of practicing lawyers in such courses and for such duration as it may deem necessary.
As 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL
 for being 
ultra vires
:
The act and practice of the Legal Education Board of excluding, restricting, and qualifying admissions to law schools in violation of the institutional academic freedom on who to admit, particularly:
Paragraph 9 of LEBMO No. 7-2016 which provides that all college graduates or graduating students applying for admission to the basic law course shall be required to pass the PhiLSAT as a requirement for admission to any law school in the Philippines and that no applicant shall be admitted for enrollment as a first year student in the basic law courses leading to a degree of either Bachelor of Laws or Juris Doctor unless he/she has passed the PhiLSAT taken within two years before the start of studies for the basic law course;
LEBMC No. 18-2018 which prescribes the passing of the PhiLSAT as a prerequisite for admission to law schools; Accordingly, the temporary restraining order issued on March 12, 2019 enjoining the Legal Education Board from implementing LEBMC No. 18-2018 is made 
PERMANENT
. The regular admission of students who were conditionally admitted and enrolled is left to the discretion of the law schools in the exercise of their academic freedom; and
Sections 15, 16, and 17 of LEBMO No. 1-2011;
The act and practice of the Legal Education Board of dictating the qualifications and classification of faculty members, dean, and dean of graduate schools of law in violation of institutional academic freedom on who may teach, particularly:
Sections 41.2(d), 50, 51, and 52 of LEBMO No. 1-2011;
Resolution No. 2014-02;
Sections 31(2), 33, 34, and 35 of LEBMO No. 2;
LEBMO No. 17-2018; and
3. The act and practice of the Legal Education Board of dictating the policies on the establishment of legal apprenticeship and legal internship programs in violation of institutional academic freedom on what to teach, particularly:
Resolution No. 2015-08;
Section 24(c) of LEBMO No. 2; and
Section 59(d) of LEBMO No. 1-2011.
SO ORDERED.
Bersamin, C. J.
, I join the separate dissenting and concurring opinion of J. Leonen.
Carpio, Carandang, Inting
, and 
Zalameda, JJ.
, concur.
Peralta, J.
, no part.
Perlas-Bernabe, J.
, Please see separate concurring opinion.
Leonen, J.
, See separate dissenting and concurring opinion.
Jardeleza, J.
, Please see separate concurring and dissenting opinion.
Caguioa, J.
, Please see separate concurring.
A. Reyes, Jr., J.
, Please see my concurring opinion.
Gesmundo, J.
, Please separate concurring and dissenting opinion.
Hernando, J.
, on official business.
Lazaro-Javier, J.
, Please see concurring and dissenting opinion.
*
 Also referred to as "Jocelyn L. DaÃ±o" in some parts of the 
rollo
.
[1]
 AN ACT PROVIDING FOR REFORMS IN LEGAL EDUCATION, CREATING FOR THE PURPOSE, A LEGAL EDUCATION BOARD AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
[2]
 
See In Re: Legal Education
, B.M. No. 979-B, September 4, 2001 (Resolution).
[3]
 Republic Act No. 7662, Sec. 4.
[4]
 Id. at Sec. 5.
[5]
 
In Re: Legal Education
, B.M. No. 979-B, supra note 2.
[6]
 Id.
[7]
 Id.
[8]
 Id.
[9]
 Id.
[10]
 LEBMO No. 7-2016, par. 1.
[11]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 230642), Vol. I, p. 216.
[12]
 LEBMO No. 7-2016, supra, par. 2.
[13]
 Id. at par. 10.
[14]
 Id. at par. 1.
[15]
 Id. at par. 2.
[16]
 Id. at par. 3.
[17]
 Id. at par. 4.
[18]
 Id. at par. 5.
[19]
 Id. at par. 6.
[20]
 Id. at par. 7.
[21]
 Id. at par. 8.
[22]
 Id. at par. 9.
[23]
 Id. at par. 10.
[24]
 Id. at par. 11.
[25]
 Id. at par. 12.
[26]
 Id. at par. 13.
[27]
 Id. at par. 14.
[28]
 Sec. 32. The imposable administrative sanctions are the following:    
  
a)
 
Termination of the law program (closing the law school);
b) 
Phase-out of the law program; and
c)
 Provisional cancellation of the Government Recognition and putting the law program of the substandard law school under Permit Status.
[29]
 Additional Rules in the Operation of the Law Program.
[30]
 LEBMO No. 7-2016, par. 15.
[31]
 LEBMO No. 11-2017, par. 2.
[32]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 230642), Vol. I, pp. 6-22.
[33]
 Id. at 8-11.
[34]
 Id. at 38-59.
[35]
 Id. at 289-320.
[36]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 242954), Vol. I, pp. 3-39.
[37]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 230642), Vol. III, pp. 1309-1311.
[38]
 Sec. 5. The Supreme Court shall have the following power:
x x x x
(5) Promulgate rules concerning pleading, practice, and procedure in all courts, the admission to the practice of law, and the integration of the Bar which, however, may be repealed, altered, or supplemental by the Batasang Pambansa. Such rules shall provide a simplified and inexpensive procedure for the speedy disposition of cases, shall be uniform for all courts of the same grade, and shall not diminish, increase, or modify substantive rights.
[39]
 Sec. 8. x x x
(5) The [Judicial and Bar] Council shall have the principal function of recommending appointees to the Judiciary. It may exercise such other functions and duties as the Supreme Court may assign to it.
[40]
 Republic Act No. 7622, Sec. 7. 
Powers and Functions
. - x x x
x x x x
(c) [T]o set the standards of accreditation for law schools taking into account, among others, the size of enrollment, 
the qualifications of the members of the faculty
, the library and other facilities, without enroaching upon the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning[.] (Emphasis supplied)
[41]
 Sec. 7. (e) [T]o prescribe minimum standards for 
law admission
 and minimum qualifications and compensation of faculty members[.] (Emphasis supplied)
[42]
 Sec. 7. (h) [T]o adopt a system of 
continuing legal education
. For this purpose, the Board may provide for the mandatory attendance of 
practicing lawyers
 in such courses and for such duration as the Board may deem necessary[.] (Emphases supplied)
[43]
 Sec. 3. 
General and Specific Objective of Legal Education
. - (a) Legal education in the Philippines is geared to attain the following objectives:
x x x x
(2) [T]o increase awareness among 
members of the legal profession
 of the needs of the poor, deprived and oppressed sectors of society[.] (Emphasis supplied)
[44]
 Sec. 7. (g) [T]o establish a 
law practice internship
 as a requirement for taking the Bar which a law student shall undergo with any duly accredited private or public law office or firm or legal assistance group anytime during the law course for a specific period that the Board may decide, but not to exceed a total of twelve (12) months. For this purpose, the Board shall prescribe the necessary guidelines for such accreditation and the specifications of such internship which shall include the actual work of a new member of the Bar[.] (Emphasis supplied)
[45]
 Sec. 2. 
Declaration of Policies
. - It is hereby declared the policy of the State to uplift the standards of legal education in order to prepare law students for advocacy, counselling, problem solving, and decision-making, to infuse in them the ethics of the legal profession; to impress on them the importance, nobility and dignity of the legal profession as an equal and indispensable partner of the Bench in the administration of justice and to develop social competence.
Towards this end, the State shall undertake appropriate reforms in the legal education system, require proper selection of law students, maintain quality among law schools, arid require legal apprenticeship and 
continuing legal education
. (Emphasis supplied)
[46]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 242954), Vol. I, p. 29.
[47]
 Id. at 86-87.
[48]
 236 Phil. 768 (1987).
[49]
 716 Phil. 208 (2013).
[50]
 
Tablarin v. Gutierrez
, supra.
[51]
 In support, petitioners-in-intervention attached to their Partial Compliance and Motion, certifications issued by St. Thomas More School of Law and Business, Inc., St. Mary's College of Tagum, Inc. College of Law, and Western Leyte College School of Law tending to show a decrease in the number of enrollees from academic year 2017 to 2018 to academic year 2018 to 2019. They also attached a Summary of Enrollment (of 44 out of the 126 law schools) furnished by the Philippine Association of Law Schools which tend to show that 37 out of the 44 law schools experienced a decrease in enrollment. (
Rollo
 [G.R. No. 242954], Vol. III, pp. 1463-1477).
[52]
 Art. VIII, Sec. 1. The Judicial power shall be vested in one Supreme Court and in such inferior courts as may be established by law.
[53]
 Art. X, Sec. 1. The Judicial power shall be vested in one Supreme Court and in such inferior courts as may be established by law. The Batasang Pambansa shall have the power to define, prescribe, and apportion the jurisdiction of the various courts, but may not deprive the Supreme Court of its jurisdiction over cases enumerated in Section five hereof.
[54]
 Sec. 1. The judicial power shall be vested in the Supreme Court and in such lower courts as may be established by law.
Judicial power includes the duty of the courts of justice to settle actual controversies involving rights which are legally demandable and enforceable, and to determine whether or not there has been a grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction on the part of any branch or instrumentality of the Government.
[55]
 
See Francisco, Jr. v. The House of Representatives
, 460 Phil. 830, 883, 909-910 (2003).
[56]
 RULES OF COURT, Rule 65, Sec. 1, provides:
Sec. 1. 
Petition for certiorari
. - When any tribunal, board or officer exercising judicial or quasi-judicial functions has acted without or in excess of its or his jurisdiction, or with grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction, and there is no appeal, or any plain, speedy, and adequate remedy in the ordinary course of law, a person aggrieved thereby may file a verified petition in the proper court, alleging the facts with certainty and praying that judgment be rendered annulling or modifying the proceedings of such tribunal, board or officer, and granting such incidental reliefs as law and justice may require.
[57]
 Id. at Sec. 2. 
Petition for Prohibition
. - When the proceedings of any tribunal, corporation, board, officer or person, whether exercising judicial, quasi-judicial or ministerial functions, are without or in excess of its or his jurisdiction, or with grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction, and there is no appeal or any other plain, speedy, and adequate remedy in the ordinary course of law, a person aggrieved thereby may file a verified petition in the proper court, alleging the facts with certainty and praying that judgment be rendered commanding the respondent to desist from further proceedings in the action or matter specified therein, or otherwise granting such incidental reliefs as law and justice may require.
[58]
 
Association of Medical Clinics for Overseas Workers, Inc. (AMCOW) v. GCC Approved Medical Centers Association, Inc.
, 802 Phil. 116, 136 (2016).
[59]
 Id. at 139.
[60]
 
Ocampo v. Enriquez
, 798 Phil. 227, 294 (2016).
[61]
 732 Phil. 1, 121 (2014).
[62]
 Sec. 5. The Supreme Court shall have the following powers:
x x x x
(2) Review, revise, reverse, modify, or affirm on appeal or 
certiorari
, as the law or the Rules of Court may provide, final judgments and orders of lower courts in:
(a) All cases in which the constitutionality or validity of any treaty, international or executive agreement, law, presidential decree, proclamation, order, instruction, ordinance, or regulation is in question.
[63]
 
Araullo v. Aquino III
, 737 Phil. 457, 531 (2014), citing 
Holy Spirit Homewoners Association, Inc. v. Defensor
, 529 Phil. 573, 587 (2006).
[64]
 
Spouses Imbong v. Ochoa
, supra.
[65]
 Supra note 55, at 891-892.
[66]
 757 Phil. 534, 544 (2015).
[67]
 G.R. No. 225442, August 8, 2017, 835 SCRA 350.
[68]
 G.R. No. 232395, July 3, 2018.
[69]
 
Garcia v. Executive Secretary
, 602 Phil. 64, 73 (2009). 
See also Angara v. Electoral Commission
, 63 Phil. 139, 158 (1936), where the Court held that the Court's duty under the Constitution is "to determine conflicting claims of authority under the Constitution and to establish for the parties in an actual controversy the rights which that instrument secures and guarantees to them."
[70]
 
Garcia v. Executive Secretary
, id., citing 
Francisco, Jr. v. The House of Representatives
, supra note 55, at 892.
[71]
 
Southern Hemisphere Engagement Network, Inc. v. Anti-Terrorism Council
, 646 Phil. 452, 471 (2010).
[72]
 
Association of Medical Clinics for Overseas Workers, Inc., (AMCOW), v. GCC Approved Medical Centers Association, Inc.
, supra note 58, at 140.
[73]
 
Information Technology Foundation of the Philippines v. Commission on Elections
, 499 Phil. 281, 304-305 (2005).
[74]
 
De Borja v. Pinalakas na Ugnayan ng Maliliit na Mangingisda ng Luzon, Mindanao at Visayas
, G.R. Nos. 185320 and 185348, April 19, 2017, 823 SCRA 550, 571-572.
[75]
 
ABAKADA Guro Partylist v. Purisima
, 584 Phil. 246, 266 (2008).
[76]
 
De Castro v. Judicial and Bar Council
, 629 Phil. 629, 686-687 (2010), citing 
Buckley v. Valeo
, 424 U.S. 1, 113-118 (1976) <
https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/424/1/
> and 
Regional Rail Reorganization Act Cases
, 419 U.S. 102, 138-148 (1974) <
https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/419/102/
> (visited May 31, 2019).
[77]
 97 Phil. 806, 809-811 (1955).
[78]
 718 Phil. 294, 305-306 (2013).
[79]
 391 Phil. 84, 106-108 (2000).
[80]
 Supra note 61.
[81]
 Id. at 124-126.
[82]
 721 Phil. 416, 520 (2013).
[83]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 230642), Vol. 1, p. 11.
[84]
 Id. at 15.
[85]
 Id. at 17.
[86]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 230642), Vol. 3, pp. 1370-1371.
[87]
 Id. at 1375-1380.
[88]
 Id. at 1381.
[89]
 Id. at 1382.
[90]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 230642), Vol. 1, p. 304.
[91]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 242954), Vol. 1, p. 22.
[92]
 
BAYAN v. Zamora
, 396 Phil. 623, 646 (2000) and 
Kilosbayan, Inc. v. Morato
, 316 Phil. 652, 695-696 (1995).
[93]
 
The Provincial Bus Operators Association of the Philippines v. Department of Labor and Employment
, G.R. No. 202275, July 17, 2018.
[94]
 
Private Hospitals, Association of the Philippines, Inc. v. Medialdea
, G.R. No. 234448, November 6, 2018.
[95]
 
See Integrated Bar of the Philippines v. Zamora
, 392 Phil. 618, 634 (2000).
[96]
 
Funa v. Villar
, 686 Phil. 571, 585 (2012).
[97]
 1987 CONSTITUTION, Art. VIII, Sec. 5(5), supra note 38.
[98]
 Sec. 6. 
Pre-Law
. - No applicant for admission to the bar examination shall be admitted unless he presents a certificate that he has satisfied the Secretary of Education that, before he began the study of law, he had pursued and satisfactorily completed in an authorized and recognized university or college, requiring for admission thereto the completion of a four-year high school course, the course of study prescribed therein for a bachelor's degree in arts or sciences with any of the following subjects as major or field of concentration: political science, logic, [E]nglish, [S]panish, history and economics.
[99]
 Sec. 16. 
Failing candidates to take review course
. - Candidates who have failed the bar examinations for three times shall be disqualified from taking another examination unless they show to the satisfaction of the court that they have enrolled in and passed regular fourth year review classes as well as attended a pre-bar review course in a recognized law school.
The professors of the individual review subjects attended by the candidates under this rule shall certify under oath that the candidates have regularly attended classes and passed the subjects under the same conditions as ordinary students and the ratings obtained by them in the particular subject.
[100]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 242954), Vol. 1, p. 18.
[101]
 Sec. 5. 
Additional requirements for other applicants
. - All applicants for admission other than those referred to in the two preceding sections shall, before being admitted to the examination, satisfactorily show that they have regularly studied law for four years, and successfully completed all prescribed courses [Bachelor of Laws] in a law school or university, officially approved and recognized by the Secretary of Education. The affidavit of the candidate, accompanied by a certificate from the university or school of law, shall be filed as evidence of such facts, and further evidence may be required by the court. 
No applicant who obtained the Bachelor of Laws degree in this jurisdiction shall be admitted to the bar examination unless he or she has satisfactorily completed the following courses in a law school or university duly recognized by the government: civil law, commercial law, remedial law, criminal law, public and private international law, political law, labor and social legislation, medical jurisprudence, taxation and legal ethics.
[102]
 Sec. 1. 
Conditions for student practice
. - A law student who has successfully completed his 3
rd
 year of the regular four-year prescribed law curriculum and is enrolled in a recognized law school's clinical legal education program approved by the Supreme Court, may appear without compensation in any civil, criminal or administrative case before any trial court, tribunal, board or officer, to represent indigent clients accepted by the legal clinic of the law school.
[103]
 Sec. 2. 
Appearance
. - The appearance of the law student authorized by this rule, shall be under the direct supervision and control of a member of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines duly accredited by the law school. Any and all pleadings, motions, briefs, memoranda or other papers to be filed, must be signed by the supervising attorney for and in behalf of the legal clinic.
[104]
 Sec. 3. 
Privileged communications
. - The Rules safeguarding privileged communications between attorney and client shall apply to similar communications made to or received by the law student, acting for the legal clinic.
[105]
 Sec. 4. 
Standards of conduct and supervision
. - The law student shall comply with the standards of professional conduct governing members of the Bar. Failure of an attorney to provide adequate supervision of student practice may be a ground for disciplinary action. 
[106]
 Supra note 91.
[107]
 Faculty of Civil Law (1734) 
(visited April 1, 2019).
[108]
 Cortes, Irene R. (1994), ESSAYS ON LEGAL EDUCATION, Quezon City: University of the Philippines, Law Center.
[109]
 The implementation of this Act created a heavy shortage of teachers so the Philippine Commission authorized the Secretary of Public Instruction to bring to the Philippines 600 teachers from the United States known as the "Thomasites."
[110]
 Philippine College of Arts and Trade, now known as the Technological University of the Philippines.
[111]
 Philippine Normal School, now known as the Philippine Normal University. 
[112]
 Act No. 74, Sec. 18.
[113]
 University of the Philippines College of Law <
law.upd.edu.ph/about-the-college/
> (visited April 1, 2019).
[114]
 ESSAYS ON LEGAL EDUCATION, supra note 108.
[115]
 Id.
[116]
 AN ACT MAKING THE INSPECTION AND RECOGNITION OF PRIVATE SCHOOLS AND COLLEGES OBLIGATORY FOR THE SECRETARY OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, March 10, 1917.
[117]
 Act No. 2706, Sec. 2. For the purposes of this Act, a private school or college shall be any private institution for teaching managed by private individuals or corporations, which is not subject to the authority and regulations of the Bureau of Education, and which offers courses of primary, intermediate, or secondary instruction, or superior courses in technical, professional, or special schools, for which diplomas are to be granted or degrees conferred.
[118]
 Id. at Sec. 6. The Secretary of Public Instruction shall from time to time prepare and publish in pamphlet form the minimum standards required of primary, intermediate, and high schools and colleges granting the degrees of bachelor of arts, bachelor of science, or any other academic degrees. He shall also from time to time prepare and publish in pamphlet form the minimum standards required of law, medical, dental, pharmaceutical, engineering, and agricultural schools or colleges and other special schools giving instruction of a technical or professional character.
[119]
 Cited in 
Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities v. Secretary of Education
, supra note 77, at 812.
[120]
 Id.
[121]
 CONSTITUTION (1935), Art. XIII, Sec. 5, provides:
Sec. 5. All educational institutions shall be under the supervision of and subject to regulation by the State. The Government shall establish and maintain a complete and adequate system of public education, and shall provide at least free public primary instruction, and citizenship training to adult citizens. All schools shall aim to develop moral character, personal discipline, civic conscience, and vocational efficiency, and to teach the duties of citizenship. Optional religious instruction shall be maintained in the public schools as now authorized by law. Universities established by the State shall enjoy academic freedom. The State shall create scholarships in arts, science, and letters for specially gifted citizens.
[122]
 Enacted on June 8, 1940.
[123]
 Approved on June 14, 1947. Repealed by Republic Act No. 8047 or the BOOK PUBLISHING INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT ACT.
[124]
 Republic Act No. 139, Sec. 1. Sec. one of Act Numbered Twenty-nine hundred and fifty-seven, as amended by Acts Numbered Thirty-one hundred and eighty-five, Thirty-four hundred and two, and Thirty-seven hundred and seventy-two, is further amended to read as follows:
Sec. 1. A board is hereby created which shall be known as the Board on Textbooks and shall have charge of the selection and approval of textbooks to be used in the public schools. The textbooks selected and approved shall be used for a period of at least six years from the date of their adoption.
The textbooks to be used in the private schools recognized or authorized by the Government shall be submitted to the Board which shall have the power to prohibit the use of any of said textbooks which it may find to be against the law or to offend the dignity and honor of the Government and people of the Philippines, or which it may find to be against the general policies of the Government, or which it may deem pedagogically unsuitable.
Decisions of the Board on Textbooks shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of Instruction upon the recommendation of the National Council of Education.
[125]
 Executive Order No. 94 (1947).
[126]
 Magsalin, M. Jr. (2003), The State of Philippine Legal Education Revisited, 
Arellano Law and Policy Review
, 4(1), 38 56 <
https://arellanolaw.edu/alpr/v4n1c.pdf
>
 (visited May 31, 2019).
[127]
 Id. at 39.
[128]
 Republic Act No. 1124, AN ACT CREATING A BOARD OF NATIONAL EDUCATION CHARGED WITH THE DUTY OF FORMULATING GENERAL EDUCATION POLICIES AND DIRECTING THE EDUCATIONAL INTERESTS OF THE NATION, June 16, 1954. Later on amended by Republic Act No. 4372 on June 19, 1965.
[129]
 Presidential Decree No. 1 (1972).
[130]
 Under Proclamation No. 1081 (1972).
[131]
 Under Presidential Decree No. 1397 (1978).
[132]
 CONSTITUTION (1973) Art. XV, Sec. 8(1), provides:
All educational institutions shall be under the supervision of, and subject to regulation by, the State. The State shall establish and maintain a complete, adequate, and integrated system of education relevant to goals of national development.
[133]
 Approved on September 11, 1982.
[134]
 Batas Pambansa Blg. 232, Part III, Chapter 3, Sec. 27, provides:
Sec. 27. 
Recognition of Schools
. - The educational operations of schools shall be subject to their prior authorization of the government, and shall be affected by recognition. In the case of government operated schools, whether local, regional, or national, recognition of educational programs and/or operations shall be deemed granted simultaneously with establishment.
In all other cases the rules and regulations governing recognition shall be prescribed and enforced by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports defining therein who are qualified to apply, providing for a permit system, stating the conditions for the grant of recognition and for its cancellation and withdrawal, and providing for related matters.
[135]
 Id. at Part IV, Chapter 1, Sec. 54. 
Declaration of Policy
. - The administration of the education system and, pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution, the supervision and regulation of educational institutions are hereby vested in the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports, without prejudice to the provisions of the charter of any state college and university.
[136]
 Id. at Chapter 2, Sec. 59. 
Declaration of Policy
. - Higher education will be granted towards the provision of better quality education, the development of middle and high-level manpower, and the intensification of research and extension services. The main thrust of higher education is to achieve equity, efficiency, and high quality in the institutions of higher learning both public and private, so that together they will provide a complete set of program offerings that meet both national and regional development needs.
[137]
 Id. at Sec. 65. Bureau of Higher Education. - The Bureau of Higher Education shall perform the following functions:
Develop, formulate and evaluate programs, projects and educational standards for a higher education;
Provide staff assistance to the Board of Higher Education in its policy formulation and advisory functions;
Provide technical assistance to encourage institutional development programs and projects;
Compile, analyze and evaluate data on higher education; and
Perform other functions provided for by law.
[138]
 The State of Philippine Legal Education Revisited, supra note 126.
[139]
 Reorganization of the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports, Prescribing its Powers and Functions and for other purposes, Executive Order No. 117 (1987), Sec. 27, provides: 
Sec. 27. 
Change of Nomenclatures
. - In the event of the adoption of a new Constitution which provides for a presidential form of government, the Ministry shall be called Department of Education, Culture and Sports and the titles Minister, Deputy Minister, and Assistant Minister shall be changed to Secretary, Undersecretary and Assistant Secretary, respectively.
[140]
 Id. at Sec. 4. 
Mandate
. - The Ministry shall be primarily responsible for the formulation, planning, implementation and coordination of the policies, plans, programs and projects in the areas of formal and non-formal education at all levels, supervise all education institutions, both public and private, and provide for the establishment and maintenance of a complete, adequate and integrated system of education relevant to the goals of national development.
[141]
 Book IV, Title VI, Chapter 1, Sec. 1.
[142]
 Id. at Chapter 4, Sec. 10.
[143]
 1987 CONSTITUTION, Art. XIV, Sec. 4(1). The State recognizes the complementary roles of public and private institutions in the educational system and shall exercise reasonable supervision and regulation of all educational institutions.
[144]
 Approved on March 30, 1989.
[145]
 Art. III. 
Organization and Administration
.
x x x x
Sec. 2. The administration of a law school shall be governed primarily by its own policies. The provisions under this Article shall only be suppletory in character.
[146]
 AN ACT CREATING THE COMMISSION ON HIGHER EDUCATION or THE HIGHER EDUCATION ACT OF 1994.
[147]
 Art. VIII, Sec. 13, provides:
Sec. 13. The Supreme Court shall have the power to promulgate rules concerning pleading, practice, and procedure in all courts, and the admission to the practice of law. Said rules shall be uniform for all courts of the same grade and shall not diminish, increase, or modify substantive rights. The existing laws on pleading, practice, and procedure are hereby repealed as statutes, and are declared Rules of Court, subject to the power of the Supreme Court to alter and modify the same. The Congress shall have the power to repeal, alter, or supplement the rules concerning pleading, practice, and procedure, and the admission to the practice of law in the Philippines.
[148]
 105 Phil. 173 (1959).
[149]
 Id. at 176.
[150]
 112 Phil. 884 (1961).
[151]
 361 Phil. 73, 88 (1999), as cited in 
Estipona, Jr. v. Lobrigo
, G.R. No. 226679, August 15, 2017, 837 SCRA 160.
[152]
 Art. X, Sec. 5(5), provides:
Sec. 5. The Supreme Court shall have the following powers:
x x x x
(5) Promulgate rules concerning pleading, practice, and procedure in all courts, the admission to the practice of law, and the integration of the Bar, which, however, may be repealed, altered, or supplemented by the Batasang Pambansa. Such rules shall provide a simplified and inexpensive procedure for the speedy disposition of cases, shall be uniform for all courts of the same grade, and shall not diminish, increase, or modify substantive rights.
[153]
 
Echegaray v. Secretary of Justice
, supra.
[154]
 
Baguio Market Vendors Multi-Purpose Cooperative (BAMARVEMPCO) v. Judge Cabato-Cortes
, 627 Phil. 543, 548 (2010).
[155]
 Id. at 549.
[156]
 
Philippine Lawyers Association v. Agrava
, supra note 148, at 176.
[157]
 
In Re: Cunanan
, 94 Phil. 534, 546 (1954).
[158]
 
People v. De Luna
, 102 Phil. 968 (1958).
[159]
 Query of Atty. Karen M. Silverio-Buffe, Former Clerk of Court, Branch 81, Romblon, Romblon, 613 Phil. 1, 23 (2009), citing 
Zaldivar v. Gonzales
, 248 Phil. 542, 555 (1988).
[160]
 
In Re: Cunanan
, supra, at 545.
[161]
 
Cayetano v. Monsod
, 278 Phil. 235, 242-243 (1991).
[162]
 57 Phil. 600, 605 (1932).
[163]
 Id.
[164]
 
See Amicus
 Brief of Dean Sedfrey Candelaria, 
rollo
 (G.R. No. 230642), Vol. 4, pp. 1657-1677.
[165]
 Republic Act No. 8557 or AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE PHILIPPINE JUDICIAL ACADEMY, DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
[166]
 Id. at Sec. 3. The PHILJA shall serve as a training school for justices, judges, court personnel, lawyers and aspirants to judicial posts. For this purpose, it shall provide and implement a curriculum for judicial education and shall conduct seminars, workshops and other training programs designed to upgrade their legal knowledge, moral fitness, probity, efficiency, and capability. It shall perform such other functions and duties as may be necessary in carrying out its mandate.
[167]
 Id.
[168]
 1987 CONSTITUTION, Art.VIII, Sec. 6.
[169]
 As amended by Supreme Court Resolutions dated May 20, 1968 and February 13, 1992.
[170]
 
In Re: Parazo
, 82 Phil. 230, 242 (1948).
[171]
 Id.
[172]
 RULES OF COURT, Rule 138, Sec. 9. 
Examination; subjects
. - Applicants, not otherwise provided for in sections 3 and 4 of this rule, shall be subjected to examinations in the following subjects: Civil Law; Labor and Social Legislation; Mercantile Law; Criminal Law; Political Law (Constitutional Law, Public Corporations, and Public Officers); International Law (Private and Public); Taxation; Remedial Law (Civil Procedure, Criminal Procedure, and Evidence); Legal Ethics and Practical Exercises (in Pleading and Conveyancing).
x x x x
Sec. 11. 
Annual examination
. - Examinations for admission to the bar of the Philippines shall take place annually in the City of Manila. They shall be held in four days to be designated by the chairman of the committee on bar examiners. The subjects shall be distributed as follows: First day: Political and International Law (morning) and Labor and Social Legislation (afternoon); Second day: Civil Law (morning) and Taxation (afternoon); Third day: Mercantile Law (morning) and Criminal Law (afternoon); Fourth day: Remedial Law (morning) and Legal Ethics and Practical Exercises (afternoon).
x x x x
Sec. 14. 
Passing average
. - In order that a candidate may be deemed to have passed his examinations successfully, he must have obtained a general average of 75 percent in all subjects, without falling below 50 percent in any subject. In determining the average, the subjects in the examination shall be given the following relative weights: Civil Law, 15 percent; Labor and Social Legislation, 10 percent; Mercantile Law, 15 percent; Criminal Law, 10 percent; Political and International Law, 15 percent; Taxation, 10 percent; Remedial Law, 20 percent; Legal Ethics and Practical Exercises, 5 percent.
[173]
 Sec. 17. 
Admission and oath of successful applicants
. - An applicant who has passed the required examination, or has been otherwise found to be entitled to admission to the bar, shall take and subscribe before the Supreme Court the corresponding oath of office.
Sec. 18. 
Certificate
. - The Supreme Court shall thereupon admit the applicant as a member of the bar for all the courts of the Philippines, and shall direct an order to be entered to that effect upon its records, and that a certificate of such record be given to him by the clerk of court, which certificate shall be his authority to practice.
[174]
 Sec. 19. 
Attorney's roll
. - The clerk of the Supreme Court shall keep a roll of all attorneys admitted to practice, which roll shall be signed by the person admitted when he receives his certificate.
[175]
 Sec. 2. 
Requirements for all applicants for admission to the bar
. - Every applicant for admission as a member of the bar must be a citizen of the Philippines, at least twenty-one years of age, of good moral character, and a resident of the Philippines; and must produce before the Supreme Court satisfactory evidence of good moral character, and that no charges against him, involving moral turpitude, have been filed or are pending in any court in the Philippines.
[176]
 
Re: Letter of Atty. Estelito P. Mendoza Proposing Reforms in the Bar Examinations through Amendments to Rule 138 of the Rules of Court
, March 9, 2010.
[177]
 
In Re: Need that Law Student Practicing Under Rule 138-A be Actually Supervised During Trial
, Bar Matter No. 730, June 13, 1997 <
https://www.lawphil.net/courts/bm/bm_730_1997.html
> (visited September 3, 2019).
[178]
 
Morfe v. Mutuc
, 130 Phil. 415, 427 (1968).
[179]
 22 U.S. 1 (1824) <
https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/22/1/
>
 (visited May 31, 2019).
[180]
 7 Cush. 53, 85 (1851) <
masscases.com/cases/sjc/61/61mass53.html
>
 (visited May 31, 2019).
[181]
 
Morfe v. Mutuc
, supra note 178, citing 
United States v. Toribio
, 15 Phil. 85, 94 (1910).
[182]
 Id., citing 
United States v. Gomez Jesus
, 31 Phil. 218, 225 (1915).
[183]
 Id., citing 
United States v. Pompeya
, 31 Phil. 245, 254 (1915).
[184]
 127 Phil. 306 (1967).
[185]
 
Philippine Association of Service Exporters, Inc. v. Drilon
, 246 Phil. 393, 398 (1988).
[186]
 
Rubi v. Provincial Board of Mindoro
, 39 Phil. 660, 708 (1919); 
Acebedo Optical Company, Inc. v. Court of Appeals
, 385 Phil. 956, 986 (2000).
[187]
 
JMM Promotion and Management, Inc. v. Court of Appeals
, 329 Phil. 87, 93 (1996).
[188]
 
Ichong v. Hernandez
, 101 Phil. 1155, 1163 (1957).
[189]
 
United States v. Gomez Jesus
, supra.
[190]
 
Council of Teachers and Staff of Colleges and Universities of the Philippines v. Secretary of Education
, G.R. No. 216930, October 9, 2018, citing 
Wisconsin v. Yoder
, 406 U.S. 205 (1972) <
https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/406/205/
> (visited May 31, 2019).
[191]
 Id.
[192]
 
Indiana Aerospace University v. Commission on Higher Education
, 408 Phil. 483, 495, (2001).
[193]
 
Council of Teachers and Staff of Colleges and Universities of the Philippines v. Secretary of Education
, supra.
[194]
 Art. XIII, Sec. 5. All educational institutions shall be under the supervision of and subject to regulation by the State.
[195]
 Art. XV, Sec. 8(1). All educational institutions shall be under the supervision of, and subject to regulation by, the State. The State shall establish and maintain a complete adequate, and integrated system of education relevant to the goals of national development.
[196]
 
Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities (PACU) v. Secretary of Education
, supra note 77, at 819.
[197]
 Supra note 195.
[198]
 Sec. 4.(1) The State recognizes the complementary roles of public and private institutions in the educational system and shall exercise reasonable supervision and regulation of all educational institutions.
[199]
 Sec. 12, Art. II of the 1987 Constitution articulates the State's policy relative to the rights of parents in the rearing of their children:
Sec. 12. The State recognizes the sanctity of family life and shall protect and strengthen the family as a basic autonomous social institution. It shall equally protect the life of the mother and the life of the unborn from conception. 
The natural and primary right and duty of parents in the rearing of the youth for civic efficiency and the development of moral character shall receive the support of the Government.
 (Emphasis supplied)
[200]
 Supra note 67.
[201]
 
See Pierce v. Society of Sisters
 (268 U.S. 510, 535 [1925]), where the U.S. Supreme Court recognized that "[t]he fundamental theory of liberty upon which all governments in this Union repose excludes any general power of the State to standardize its children by forcing them to accept instruction from public teachers only." <
https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/268/510/
> (visited May 30, 2019).
Nevertheless, a shift of responsibility from the parent to the State is observed in the light of the compulsory education laws. (Brooke Wilkins [2005], Should Public Education be a Federal Fundamental Right?, 
Brigham Young University Education and Law Journal
, 2005[2], 261-290) <
https://digitalcommons.law.byu.edu/elj/vol2005/iss2/8/
> (visited May 30, 2019).
[202]
 
See
 Art. 13, Sec. 3 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights which provides that:
Sec. 3. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to have respect for the liberty of parents and, when applicable, legal guardians to choose for their children schools, other than,those established by the public authorities x x x. <
https://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/cescr.aspx
> (visited May 30, 2019).
[203]
 As a legal concept, supervision is usually understood in relation with the concept of control. Thus, in 
Bito-onon v. Yap Fernandez
 (403 Phil. 693, 702-703 [2011]), the Court held that "[s]upervisory power, when contrasted with control, is the power of mere oversight over an inferior body; it does not include any restraining authority over such body. [Officer] in control [lays] down the rules in the doing of an act. If they are not followed, it is discretionary on his part to order the act undone or re-done by his subordinate or he may even decide to do it himself. Supervision does not cover such authority. Supervising officers merely see to it that the rules are followed, but he himself does not lay down such rules, nor does he have the discretion to modify or replace them. If the rules are not observed, he may order the work done or re-done to conform to the prescribed rules. He cannot prescribe his own manner for the doing of the act."
[204]
 
Council of Teachers and Staff of Colleges and Universities of the Philippines v. Secretary of Education
, supra note 190.
[205]
 Bernas, Joaquin G. (1958), State "Supervision" and "Regulation" of Private Schools, 
Philippine Studies
, 6(3) 295-314 <
https://www.jstor.org/stable/42719389
> (visited May 30, 2019).
[206]
 Id. at 303.
[207]
 Id.
[208]
 
The Metropolitan Manila Development Authority v. Viron Transportation Co., Inc.
, 557 Phil. 121, 140. (2007).
[209]
 568 Phil. 658, 702 (2008).
[210]
 246 Phil. 393, 399 (1988).
[211]
 Supra note 190.
[212]
 
Civil Liberties Union v. The Executive Secretary
, 272 Phil. 147, 162 (1991).
[213]
 Article XV, Sec. 8(2).
[214]
 CONSTITUTION (1935), Art. 13, Sec. 5, provides:
Sec. 5. x x x "Universities established by the State shall enjoy academic freedom." x x x
[215]
 
Ateneo de Manila University v. Judge Capulong
, 294 Phil. 654, 672 (1993).
[216]
 Id. at 672-673.
[217]
 As notoriously stated in 
Keyishian v. Board of Regents
 (385 U.S. 589, 603 [1967]), "academic freedom x x x is x x x a special concern of the First Amendment, which does not tolerate laws that cast a pall of orthodoxy over the classroom." <
https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/385/589/
> (visited May 31, 2019).
[218]
 
Ateneo de Manila University v. Judge Capulong
, supra note 215, at 674.
[219]
 220 Phil. 379 (1985).
[220]
 264 Phil. 98 (1990).
[221]
 214 Phil. 319 (1984).
[222]
 226 Phil. 596 (1986).
[223]
 160-A Phil. 929, 943-944 (1975).
[224]
 Id. at 944.
[225]
 354 U.S. 234, 263 (1957) <
https:/supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/354/234/
> (visited May 31, 2019).
[226]
 To illustrate, Art. XIV, Sec. 3(2) of the 1987 Constitution prescribes that all educational institutions "shall inculcate patriotism and nationalism, foster love of humanity, respect for human rights, appreciation of the role of national heroes in the historical development of the country, teach the rights and duties of citizenship, strengthen ethical and spiritual values, develop moral character and personal discipline, encourage critical and creative thinking, broaden scientific and technological knowledge, and promote vocational efficiency." These are understood as mere guidelines for the State.
[227]
 243 Phil. 993, 1006 (1988).
[228]
 408 Phil. 132 (2001).
[229]
 
See
 concurring opinion of Justice Teehankee in 
Garcia v. The Faculty and Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
, supra note 223, at 949.
[230]
 
Calawag v. University of the Philippines Visayas
, supra note 49, at 216.
[231]
 
Garcia v. The Faculty and Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
, supra note 223, at 943.
[232]
 Supra note 215, at 661.
[233]
 Republic Act No. 9155 (2001) or the GOVERNANCE OF BASIC EDUCATION ACT OF 2001.
[234]
 
Council of Teachers and Staff of Colleges and Universities of the Philippines v. Secretary of Education
, supra note 190.
[235]
 1987 CONSTITUTION, Art. XIV, Sec. 2(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5).
[236]
 IV RECORD, CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION 58 (August 29, 1986).
[237]
 Id. at 53.
[238]
 Art. 13(2). The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize that, with a view to achieving the full realization of this right:
(a) Primary education shall be compulsory and available free to all;
(b) Secondary education in its different forms, including technical and vocational secondary education, shall be made generally available and accessible to all by every appropriate means, and in particular by the progressive introduction of free education;
(c) Higher education shall be made equally accessible to all, on the basis of capacity, by every appropriate means, and in particular by the progressive introduction of free education;
(d) Fundamental education shall be encouraged or intensified as far as possible for those persons who have not received or completed the whole period of their primary education; [and]
(e) The development of a system of schools at all levels shall be actively pursued, an adequate fellowship system shall be established, and the material conditions of teaching staff shall be continuously improved. Supra note 202.
[239]
 Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 13: The Right to Education (Art. 13). (Twenty-first Session, December 8, 1999) <
https://www.refworld.org/docid/4538838c22.html
> (visited May 31, 2019).
[240]
 Id.
[241]
 Art. 26(1). Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages. Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and professional education shall be made generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit.<
https://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/
> (visited May 31, 2019).
[242]
 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; supra note 202, at Art. 13(2)(c).
[243]
 Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 13: The Right to Education (Art. 13), supra note 239.
[244]
 Id.
[245]
 Supra note 215, at 675-676.
[246]
 Supra note 219, at 383-384.
[247]
 
Calawag v. University of the Philippines Visayas
, supra note 49, at 217.
[248]
 IV RECORD, CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION, supra note 236.
[249]
 B.M. No. 979-B, supra note 2.
[250]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 230642), Vol. 1, p. 17.
[251]
 Id. at 100.
[252]
 Id. at 101.
[253]
 B.M. No. 979-B, supra note 2.
[254]
 
Land Bank of the Philippines v. AMS Farming Corporation
, 590 Phil. 170, 203 (2008).
[255]
 
Mactan-Cebu International Airport Authority v. Urgello
, 549 Phil. 302, 322 (2007).
[256]
 I RECORD, SENATE 9
th
 CONGRESS 2
ND
 SESSION 458 (August 24, 1993).
Senator Tolentino: Thank you, Mr. President.
Now, here is one question on which I would like to be enlightened. The Council here may provide for the minimum standards for law admission and minimum qualifications to faculty members. I assume that this law admission means admission to the college of law of the student. x x x x
I assume that minimum standards for law admission here refers [sic] to the requirements that the student must fulfill before being admitted to the law school. x x x
[257]
 
Section 15. Prerequisites to Admission to Law School
. - Section 6, Rule 138 of the Rules of Court prescribes: "No applicant for admission to the Bar Examination shall be admitted unless he presents a certificate that he has satisfied the Secretary of Education that, before he began the study of law, 
he had pursued and satisfactorily completed in an authorized and recognized university or college, requiring for admission thereto the completion of a four-year high school course, the course of study prescribed therein for a bachelor's degree in arts or sciences with any of the following subjects as major or field of concentration: political science, logic, English, Spanish, history and economics
." (Underscoring supplied)
[258]
 I RECORD, SENATE 9
th
 CONGRESS 2
ND
 SESSION, supra note 256, at 456-457.
[259]
 Id. at 711 (September 22, 1993).
[260]
 
Lawyers Against Monopoly and Poverty (LAMP) v. The Secretary of Budget and Management
, 686 Phil. 357, 372-373 (2012).
[261]
 Re: Proposed Reforms in the Bar Examinations.
[262]
 Supra note 227, at 1005.
[263]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 230642 ), Vo1. 1, p. 305.
[264]
 Id. at 305 and 1567-1568.
[265]
 Id. at 1564.
[266]
 Id. at 1569.
[267]
 Id. at 1582.
[268]
 
Tablarin v. Gutierrez
, supra note 48, at 782-784.
[269]
 259 Phil. 1016, 1021-1022 (1989).
[270]
 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
, supra note 223, at 945.
[271]
 
See
 Commission on Higher Education Memorandum Order No. 6 (1996) <
https://ched.gov.ph/cmo-6-s-1996/
> (visited May 31, 2019).
[272]
 Id.
[273]
 
See
 CHED Memorandum Order No. 03 (2003) <
https://ched.gov.ph/cmo-3-s-2003-2/
>  (visited September 3, 2019).
[274]
 The American Bar Association Standards and Rules of Procedure for Approval of Law Schools 2018 to 2019 provide:
Standard 503. ADMISSION TEST
A law school shall require each applicant for admission as a first-year J.D. degree student to take a valid and reliable admission test to assist the school and the applicant in assessing the applicant's capability of satisfactorily completing the school's program of legal education. In making admissions decisions, a law school shall use the test results in a manner that is consistent with the current guidelines regarding proper use of the test results provided by the agency that developed the test. 
Interpretation 503-1
A law school that uses an admission test other than the Law School Admission Test sponsored by the Law School Admission Council shall demonstrate that such other test is a valid and reliable test to assist the school in assessing an applicant's capability to satisfactorily complete the school's program of legal education.
Interpretation 503-2
This Standard does not prescribe the particular weight that a law school should give to an applicant's' admission test score in deciding whether to admit or deny admission to the applicant.
Interpretation 503-3
(a) It is not a violation of this Standard for a law school to admit no more than 10% of an entering class without requiring the LSAT from:
(1) Students in an undergraduate program of the same institution as the J.D. program; and/or
(2) Students seeking the J.D. degree in combination with a degree in a different discipline.
(b) Applicants admitted under subsection (a) must meet the following conditions:
(1) Scored at or above the 85
th
 percentile on the ACT or SAT for purposes of subsection (a)(1), or for purposes of subsection (a)(2), scored at or above the 85th percentile on the GRE or GMAT; and
(2) Ranked in the top 10% of their undergraduate class through six semesters of academic work, or achieved a cumulative GPA of 3.5 or above through six semesters of academic work.
<
https://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/publications/misc/legal_education/Standards/2018-2019ABAStandardsforApprovalofLawSchools/2018-2019-aba-standards-chapter5.pdf
> (visited May 31, 2019).
[275]
 16. Separability Clause - If any part or provision of this memorandum order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, all other provisions shall remain valid and effective.
[276]
 
Tablarin v. Gutierrez
, supra note 48, at 779.
[277]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 230642), Vol. 1, pp. 119-120.
[278]
 Id. at 123.
[279]
 LEBMO No. 7-2016, provides:
x x x x
13. General Average - Beginning in Academic/School Year 2018-2019, the requirement of a general average of not less than eighty percent (80%) or 2.5 for admission in the basic law course under Section 23 of [LEBMO No. 1-2011] shall be withdrawn and removed.
[280]
 Supra note 277, at 123 and 136-137.
[281]
 702 Phil. 191, 201 (2013).
[282]
 G.R. No. 211273, April 18, 2018.
[283]
 
Amicus
 Brief of Dean Sedfrey Candelaria, supra note 164, at 1674.
[284]
 Supra note 277, at 133.
[285]
 Supra note 277, at 191-192.
SEPARATE CONCURRING OPINION
PERLAS-BERNABE, J.:
I concur in the result,
[1]
 but I tender this opinion to briefly explain my reasons as to why the provisions of Legal Education Board (LEB) Memorandum Order No. 7, Series of 2016
[2]
 (LEBMO No. 7-2016) that mandatorily require the passing of the Philippine Law School Admission Test (PhiLSAT) as a pre-requisite for admission to any law school violate institutional academic freedom and hence, unconstitutional.
Section 5 (2), Article XIV of the 1987 Constitution guarantees that "
[a]cademic freedom
 shall be enjoyed in 
all institutions of higher learning
."
[3]
 According to case law, "[t]his institutional academic freedom includes the right of the school or college to decide for itself, its aims and objectives, and how best to attain them 
free from outside coercion or interference save possibly when the overriding public welfare calls for some restraint
. The essential freedoms subsumed in the term 'academic freedom' encompasses the freedom to determine for itself on academic grounds: (1) [w]ho may teach, (2) [w]hat may be taught, (3) [h]ow it shall be taught, and (4) 
[w]ho may be admitted to study
."
[4]
 This fourth freedom of law schools to determine "who may be admitted to study" is at the core of the present controversy involving the PhiLSAT.
The PhiLSAT is essentially a standardized aptitude test measuring the examinees' communications and language proficiency, critical thinking skills, and verbal and quantitative reasoning.
[5]
 It is designed to measure the academic potential of the examinee to pursue the study of law.
[6]
 One of the essential provisions of LEBMO No. 7-2016 is paragraph 9, which states that passing the PhiLSAT is required for admission to any law school in the Philippines, and that no applicant shall be admitted for enrollment as a first year student in the basic law courses leading to a degree of either Bachelor of Laws or Juris Doctor unless he/she has passed the PhiLSAT taken within two (2) years before the start of the study. The PhiLSAT has a passing score of 55%.
[7]
 To concretize the mandatory nature of the PhiLSAT, paragraph 15 of LEBMO No. 7-2016 provides that law schools that violate the issuance shall be administratively sanctioned and/or fined in the amount of up to P10,000.00 for each infraction. The administrative sanctions direly encompass: (a) termination of the law program (closing the law school); (b) phasing out of the law program; and (c) provisional cancellation of the Government Recognition and putting the law program of the substandard law school under Permit Status.
[8]
 As the PhiLSAT is a requirement mandatorily imposed by LEBMO No. 7-2016, non-compliance therewith would result into these potential consequences.
Compliance with the PhiLSAT effectively means a surrender of the law schools' academic freedom to determine who to admit to their institutions for study. This is because the PhiLSAT operates as a sifting mechanism that narrows down the pool of potential candidates from which law schools may then select their future students. With the grave administrative sanctions imposed for non-compliance, the surrender of this facet of academic freedom is clearly compulsory, because failing to subscribe to the PhiLSAT requirement is tantamount to the law school risking its complete closure or the phasing out of its law program. 
This effectively results in the complete control - not mere supervision - of the State over a significant aspect of the institutions' academic freedom.
Notably, the core legal basis for the PhiLSAT is derived from Section 7 (e) of Republic Act No. 7662
[9]
 which empowers the LEB "to prescribe the minimum standards for law admission x x x." On a broader scale, Section 7 (b) of the same law empowers the LEB "to supervise the law schools in the country x x x." This is a specific iteration of Section 4 (1), Article XIV of the 1987 Constitution which provides that "
[t]he State x x x shall exercise 
reasonable supervision
 and regulation of all educational institutions
."
[10]
 
"Reasonable supervision," as the Framers intended, meant only "external" and not "internal" governance; as such, it is meant to exclude the right to manage, dictate, overrule, prohibit, and dominate.
[11]
As elucidated in the fairly recent case of 
Council of Teachers and Staff of Colleges and Universities of the Philippines v. Secretary of Education
:
[12]
The Framers were explicit, however, that this supervision refers to 
external governance
, as opposed to 
internal governance
 which was reserved to the respective school boards
, thus:
Madam President, Section 2(b) introduces four changes: one, the addition of the word "reasonable" before the phrase "supervision and regulation"; two, the addition of the word "quality" before the word "education"; three, the change of the wordings in the 1973 Constitution referring to a system of education, requiring the same to be relevant to the goals of national development, to the present expression of "relevant to the needs of the people and society"; and four, the explanation of the meaning of the expression "integrated system of education" by defining the same as the 
recognition and strengthening of the complementary roles of public and private educational institutions as separate but integral parts of the total Philippine educational system
.
When we speak of State supervision and regulation, we refer to the 
external governance
 of educational institutions
, particularly private educational institutions as distinguished from the internal governance by their respective boards of directors or trustees and their administrative officials. Even without a provision on external governance, the State would still have the inherent right to regulate educational institutions through the exercise of its police power. We have thought it advisable to restate the supervisory and regulatory functions of the State provided in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions with the addition of the word "reasonable." We found it necessary to add the word "reasonable" because of an 
obiter dictum
 of our Supreme Court in a decision in the case of 
Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities vs. The Secretary of Education and the Board of Textbooks
 in 1955. In that case, the court said, and I quote:
It is enough to point out that local educators and writers think the Constitution provides for control of education by the State.
The Solicitor General cites many authorities to show that the power to regulate means power to control, and quotes from the proceedings of the Constitutional Convention to prove that State control of private education was intended by organic law.
The addition, therefore, of the word "reasonable" is meant to underscore the sense of the committee, that when the Constitution speaks of State supervision and regulation, 
it does not in any way mean control
. We refer only to the power of the State to provide regulations and to see to it that these regulations are duly followed and implemented. 
It does not include the right to manage, dictate, overrule and prohibit. Therefore, it does not include the right to dominate.
[13]
 (Emphases and underscoring supplied)
As pointed out by Dean Sedfrey M. Candelaria (Dean Candelaria) in his Amicus Brief, "[w]hen [the] LEB took over the functions of the [Commission on Higher Education (CHED)] in relation to law schools, it is safe to presume that the scope of power of [the] LEB should be no more than what [the] CHED had traditionally exercised over law schools."
[14]
 As to what he insinuates as "reasonable supervision" over institutions of higher learning, the State may, through the appropriate agency, determine the: (a) minimum unit requirements for a specific academic program; (b) general education distribution requirements; and (c) specific professional subjects as may be stipulated by the various licensing entities.
[15]
 These activities may ostensibly fall under the category of "external governance" and hence, "reasonable supervision," as compared to a mandatory, exclusively StateÂ­ crafted aptitude test which not only operates as a predetermination of the schools' potential candidates for admission but also brandishes the total closure of the institution or phasing out of the academic program as punishment for noncompliance. The latter is, to my mind, a form of StateÂ­ domination that translates to "internal governance" and hence, the exercise of the State's control over academic freedom. As earlier intimated, this strays from the intent of the Framers of our Constitution.
While the more intricate contours of "academic freedom" have yet to be charted in our jurisprudence as compared to other individual liberties, Dean Candelaria, in his Amicus Brief, also broached the idea that academic freedom is an aspect of the freedom of expression, and hence, any regulation thereof is subject to strict scrutiny.
[16]
 The tie between academic freedom and freedom of expression has yet to be definitively settled in our jurisprudence, Nevertheless, there is ostensible merit in this theory since an institution of higher learning may be treated as the embodiment of the composite rights of its individual educators, and ultimately, an educational method of instruction is a form of communication. Learning necessarily connotes an exchange of ideas. The transmission of knowledge does not happen in a vacuum but within a framework that the school autonomously determines - subject only to reasonable State regulation - a cognate part of which is who it deems fit for its instruction. As Associate Justice Marvic M.V.F. Leonen eloquently stated in his Separate Dissenting and Concurring Opinion, academic discussions and other forms of scholarship are manifestations and extensions of an individual's thoughts and beliefs.
[17]
 Academic freedom is anchored on the recognition that academic institutions perform a social function, and its business is conducted for the common good; that is, it is a necessary tool for critical inquiry of truth and its free exposition. Thus, 
the guarantee of academic freedom is complementary to the freedom of expression and the freedom of the mind
.
[18]
The theoretical transposition of the concept of freedom of expression/ freedom of the mind to institutional academic freedom would greatly impact the dynamic of how this Court would henceforth deal with regulations affecting institutions of higher learning because, as mentioned, the test to be applied would be strict scrutiny.
[19]
 "Strict scrutiny entails that the presumed law or policy must be justified by a compelling state or government interest, 
that such law or policy must be narrowly tailored to achieve that goal or interest, and that the law or policy must be the least restrictive means for achieving that interest
."
[20]
In this case, while the policy of the State to "uplift the standards of legal education"
[21]
 may be characterized as a compelling State interest, the means of achieving this goal, through the PhiLSAT, together with its mandatory and exclusionary features as above-discussed, do not appear to be narrowly tailored or the least restrictive means for achieving this interest. There is no concrete showing why the implementation of a standardized but optional State aptitude exam, which schools may freely adopt in their discretion as a tool for their own determination of who to admit (such as the National Medical Aptitude Test for medical schools or the Law School Admission Test in the United States of America), would be less of a "sifting" measure than a mandatory and exclusively State-determined one (such as the PhiLSAT). This is especially so since, as conceded by LEB Chairperson Emerson B. Aquende during the oral arguments in this case, there is no statistical basis
[22]
 to show the propensity of the PhiLSAT to improve the quality of legal education. Furthermore, no other study or evaluation regarding the viability of the PhiLSAT was shown to this effect. It is true that in a general sense, the PhiLSAT operates as a basic aptitude exam which seeks to test skills that have rational connection to the field of law, 
i.e.
, communications and language proficiency, critical thinking, and verbal and quantitative reasoning. However, because the test was solely crafted by the LEB, it completely excludes the law schools' input and participation, and worse, even puts their very existence in jeopardy should there be non-subservience. Verily, an absolutist approach in any facet of academic freedom would not only result in an overly restrictive State regulation, it would also be practically counterproductive because law schools, being at the forefront, are the quintessential stakeholders to the mission of improving legal education. Again, by constitutional fiat, the State's role is limited to reasonable supervision, not control. For these reasons, the provisions of LEBMO No. 7-2016 on the PhiLSAT clearly transgress institutional academic freedom.
Accordingly, I concur in the result.
[1]
 See 
fallo
 of the 
ponencia
, pp. 101-103.
[2]
 "POLICIES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF A NATIONWIDE UNIFORM LAW SCHOOL ADMISSION TEST FOR APPLICANTS TO THE BASIC LAW COURSES IN ALL LAW SCHOOLS IN THE COUNTRY," issued on December 29, 2016.
[3]
 Emphases supplied.
[4]
 
Miriam College Foundation, Inc. v. Court of Appeals
, 401 Phil. 431, 455-456 (2000); emphases and underscoring supplied.
[5]
 
Rollo
 (G.R. No. 230642), Vol. I, p. 216.
[6]
 See LEBMO No. 7-2016, paragraph 2.
[7]
 See LEBMO No. 7-2016, paragraph 14.
[8]
 See LEBMO No. 2-2013, "LEGAL EDUCATION BOARD MEMORANDUM ORDER No. 2: ADDITIONAL RULES IN THE OPERATION OF THE LAW PROGRAM" (June 1, 2014), Section 32.
[9]
 Entitled "AN ACT PROVIDING FOR REFORMS IN LEGAL EDUCATION, CREATING FOR THE PURPOSE A LEGAL EDUCATION BOARD, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES," otherwise known as the "LEGAL EDUCATION REFORM ACT OF 1993," approved on December 23, 1993.
[10]
 Emphasis and underscoring supplied.
[11]
 See Amicus Brief dated March 27, 2019 of Dean Sedfrey M. Candelaria, p. 5; emphasis and underscoring supplied.
[12]
 See G.R. Nos. 216930, 217451, 217752, 218045, 218098, 218123 and 218465, October 9, 2018.
[13]
 See id.
[14]
 See Amicus Brief, p. 12.
[15]
 Id. at 7.
[16]
 Id. at 12-13.
[17]
 See Justice Leonen's Separate Dissenting and Concurring Opinion.
[18]
 See id.
[19]
 Strict scrutiny applies to "laws dealing with freedom of the mind." It is also "used today to test the validity of laws dealing with the regulation of speech, gender, or race as well as other fundamental rights as expansion from its earlier applications to equal protection." (See 
White Light Corporation v. City of Manila
, 596 Phil. 444, 462-463 [2009].)
[20]
 
Divinagracia v. Consolidated Broadcasting System, Inc.
, 602 Phil. 625, 663 (2009); underscoring supplied.
[21]
 See Republic Act No. 7662, Section 2.
[22]
 See TSN, March 5, 2019, pp. 171-182.
SEPARATE DISSENTING AND CONCURRING OPINION
LEONEN, J.:
The provisions permitting the imposition of the Philippine Law School Admission Test, as well as the entire concept of the Legal Education Board, are unconstitutional for intruding on the academic freedom of law schools and the universities and colleges to which they belong. The State has no business in deciding and substituting its judgment for the academic institutions. Any government attempt to dictate upon universities the qualifications of their studentry or interfere with their curriculum undermines the school's academic freedom.
Institutions of learning perform a vital function in nurturing and sharpening the people's understanding and intellect. They ensure an educated and thriving citizenry on whom a nation's civilization and life depend. Education leads to an economically productive populace through learned skill. More importantly, it gears the people toward thinking more prudently and critically.
Without educational institutions, our country will inevitably approach a shallow and dismal future. Thus, the State has a paramount interest in guaranteeing that they flourish and function robustly. Part and parcel of this guarantee is to allow them to freely determine for themselves their "aims and objectives and how best to attain them."
[1]
One (1) of the four (4) essential academic freedoms is the academic institutions' right to determine who they will admit to study. In ascertaining who to admit in their institutions, law schools should be given autonomy in establishing their own policies, including the examination that they will employ.
The Philippine Law School Admission Test is an unwarranted intrusion into this essential freedom. The government's imposition of a passing score as a bar to admission violates the educational institutions' academic freedom to determine 
who to admit to study
. The existence of the Legal Education Board, on the other hand, interferes with the right of academic institutions with respect to how to teach and who to teach.
I
Academic freedom, as enshrined in our present Constitution, guarantees the fundamental protection to academic institutions. Article XIV, Section 5(2) states that "[a]cademic freedom shall be enjoyed in all institutions of higher learning."
This provision is equivalent to its precursor, Article XV, Section 8(2) of the 1973 Constitution, which stated that "[a]ll institutions of higher learning shall enjoy academic freedom." This, in turn, was an expansion of its counterpart in the 1935 Constitution which limited the grant 'of academic freedom to state-established universities. Article XIII, Section 5 of the 1935 Constitution stated:
SECTION 5. All educational institutions shall be under the supervision of and subject to regulation by the State; The Government shall establish and maintain a complete and adequate system of public education, and shall provide at least free public primary instruction, and citizenship training to adult citizens. All schools shall aim to develop moral character, personal discipline, civic conscience, and vocational efficiency, and to teach the duties of citizenship. Optional religious instruction shall be maintained in the public schools as now authorized by law. Universities established by the State shall enjoy academic freedom. TheÂ· State shall create scholarships in arts, science, and letters for specially gifted citizens.
From this, the 1973 Constitution provided a broader protection by giving the same guarantee to private educational institutions.
[2]
The nature and scope of academic freedom was first discussed at length in the 1975 case of 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
.
[3]
 This Court recognized academic freedom as an institutional facet, and not solely confined to individual academic freedom or the right of faculty members to pursue their studies without fear of reprisal. In interpreting the import of the constitutional provision, this Court said:
For it is to be noted that the reference is to the "institutions of higher learning" as the recipients of this boon. 
It would follow then that the school or college itself is possessed of such a right. It decides for itself its aims and objectives and how best to attain them. It is free from outside coercion or interference save possibly when the overriding public welfare calls for some restraint. It has a wide sphere of autonomy certainly extending to the choice of students.
 This constitutional provision is not to be construed in a niggardly manner or in a grudging fashion. That would be to frustrate its purpose, nullify its intent. Former President Vicente G. Sinco of the University of the Philippines, in his Philippine Political Law, is similarly of the view that it "definitely grants the right of academic freedom to the university as an institution as distinguished from the academic freedom of a university professor."
[4]
 (Emphasis supplied, citation omitted)
Garcia
 concerned a Petition for Mandamus filed by Epicharis Garcia, a woman, to compel the Loyola School of Theology to allow her to continue her studies in the seminary. In dismissing the Petition, this Court upheld the discretion of educational institutions to choose who may be admitted to study.
[5]
 
Garcia
 referred to the four (4) essential freedoms as the parameters of academic freedom:
Justice Frankfurter, with his extensive background in legal education as a former Professor of the Harvard Law School, referred to what he called the business of a university and the four essential freedoms in the following language: "It is the business of a university to provide that atmosphere which is most conducive to speculation, experiment and creation. 
It is an atmosphere in which there prevail 'the four essential freedoms' of a university - to determine for itself on academic grounds who may teach, what may be taught, how it shall be taught, and who may be admitted to study.
"
[6]
 (Emphasis supplied, citation omitted)
Justice Claudio Teehankee's concurring opinion in 
Garcia
 is also instructive. He recognized that courts have neither the competence nor the inclination to decide who shall be admitted to an educational institution. Instead, they will only overturn the judgment of academic institutions after an exhaustion of administrative remedies and upon showing of arbitrariness on the school's part. He explained:
Only after exhaustion of administrative remedies and when there is marked arbitrariness, will the courts interfere with the academic judgment of the school faculty and the proper authorities as to the competence and fitness of an applicant for enrollment or to continue taking up graduate studies in a graduate school. The courts simply do not have the competence nor inclination to constitute themselves as Admission Committees of the universities and institutions of higher learning and to substitute their judgment for that of the regularly constituted Admission Committees of such educational institutions. Were the courts to do so, they would conceivably be swamped with petitions for admission from the thousands refused admission every year, and next the thousands who flunked and were dropped would also be petitioning the courts for a judicial review of their grades.
[7]
Following the ruling in 
Garcia
, this Court in 
Tangonan v. PaÃ±o
[8]
 reiterated that it cannot compel academic institutions to admit students who fail to meet standard policies and qualifications. To rule otherwise, it held, would violate the institution's discretion on the admission and enrollment of students as a major component of academic freedom:
[S]till petitioner would want Us to compel respondent school to enroll her despite her failure to meet the standard policies and qualifications set by the school. To grant such relief would be doing violence to the academic freedom enjoyed by the respondent school enshrined under Article XV, Section 8, Par. 2 of our Constitution which mandates "that all institutions of higher learning shall enjoy academic freedom." This institutional academic freedom includes not only the freedom of professionally qualified persons to inquire, discover, publish and teach the truth as they see it in the field of their competence subject to no control or authority except of rational methods by which truths and conclusions are sought and established in these disciplines, but also the right of the school or college to decide for itself, its aims and objectives, and how best to attain them - the grant being to institutions of higher learning - free from outside coercion or interference save possibly when the overriding public welfare calls for some restraint.
[9]
In 
San Sebastian College v. Court of Appeals
,
[10]
 this Court likewise ruled that a student's failure to comply with academic standards justifies the institution's refusal to admit him or her.
An institution's discretion in determining who to admit extends to its decision on who to dismiss. In 
Ateneo De Manila University v. Capulong
,
[11]
 this Court upheld the institution's discretion to dismiss erring students. It reiterated that schools have the right to establish academic and disciplinary standards, and in failing to comply with these standards, a student can be validly dismissed:
Since 
Garcia v. Loyola School of Theology
, we have consistently upheld the salutary proposition that admission to an institution of higher learning is discretionary upon a school, the same being a privilege on the part of the student rather than a right. While under the Education Act of 1982, students have a right "to freely choose their field of study, subject to existing curricula and to continue their course therein up to graduation," such right is subject, as all rights are, to the established academic and disciplinary standards laid down by the academic institution.
For private schools have the right to establish reasonable rules and regulations for the admission, discipline and promotion of students. . . .
Such rules are "incident to the very object of incorporation and indispensable to the successful management of the college. The rules may include those governing student discipline." Going a step further, the establishment of rules governing university-student relations, particularly those pertaining to student discipline, may be regarded as vital, not merely to the smooth and efficient operation of the institution, but to its very survival.
[12]
 (Citations omitted)
In 
Licup v. University of San Carlos
,
[13]
 the petitioners were students who had been denied readmission to the university after a chaotic assembly that resulted in violations of the university handbook rules. They were also found to have academic deficiencies. In upholding the university's decision, this Court held that the students were not deprived of due process during the investigation, and that their serious breach of discipline and failure to maintain the academic standard forfeited their contractual right to continue studying in the university.
[14]
 This Court ruled similarly in 
Alcuaz v. Philippine School of Business Administration
,
[15]
 
Magtibay v. Garcia
,
[16]
 
University of San Agustin v. Court of Appeals
,
[17]
 and 
Spouses Go v. Colegio de San Juan de Letran
.
[18]
In 
Miriam College Foundation, Inc. v. Court of Appeals
,
[19]
 this Court further amplified the scope of academic freedom when it upheld the institution's right to discipline its students. It pronounced:
Section 5 (2), Article XIV of the Constitution guarantees all institutions of higher learning academic freedom. This institutional academic freedom includes the right of the school or college to decide for itself, its aims and objectives, and how best to attain them free from outside coercion or interference save possibly when the overriding public welfare calls for some restraint. The essential freedoms subsumed in the term "academic freedom" encompasses the freedom to determine for itself on academic grounds:
(1) Who may teach, 
(2) What may be taught, 
(3) How it shall be taught, and
(4) Who may be admitted to study.
The right of the school to discipline its students is at once apparent in the third freedom, 
i.e.
, "how it shall be taught." A school certainly cannot function in an atmosphere of anarchy.
Thus, there can be no doubt that the establishment of an educational institution requires rules and regulations necessary for the maintenance of an orderly educational program and the creation of an educational environment conducive to learning. Such rules and regulations are equally necessary for the protection of the students, faculty, and property.
Moreover, the school has an interest in teaching the student discipline, a necessary, if not indispensable, value in any field of learning. By instilling discipline, the school teaches discipline. Accordingly, the right to discipline the student likewise finds basis in the freedom "what to teach."
[20]
 (Citations omitted)
An academic institution's right to discipline its students was held applicable even to students' activities outside campus premises. In 
Angeles v. Sison
,
[21]
 this Court ruled that the school's power over its students does not absolutely cease when they set foot outside the school premises. Moreover, the students' conduct, if directly affecting the school's good order and welfare, may be subject to its discipline:
A college, or any school for that matter, has a dual responsibility to its students. One is to provide opportunities for learning and the other is to help them grow and develop into mature, responsible, effective and worthy citizens of the community. Discipline is one of the means to carry out the second responsibility.
Thus, there can be no doubt that the establishment of an educational institution requires rules and regulations necessary for the maintenance of an orderly educational program and the creation of an educational environment conducive to learning. Such rules and regulations are equally necessary for the protection of the students, faculty, and property. The power of school officials to investigate, an adjunct of its power to suspend or expel, is a necessary corollary to the enforcement of such rules and regulations and the maintenance of a safe and orderly educational environment conducive to learning.
. . . .
Common sense dictates that the school retains its power to compel its students in or off-campus to a norm of conduct compatible with their standing as members of the academic community. Hence, when as in the case at bar, the misconduct complained of directly affects the suitability of the alleged violators as students, there is no reason why the school cannot impose the same disciplinary action as when the act took place inside the campus.
[22]
In the more recent case of 
Cudia v. Superintendent of the Philippine Military Academy
,
[23]
 this Court reiterated that a school's right to discipline its students is part of the third essential freedom. There, this Court upheld the Philippine Military Academy's enforcement of its internal rules pursuant to its academic freedom. The petitioner in Cudia was a graduating honor student who was dismissed for violating the institution's Honor Code. Affirming the dismissal, this Court ruled that the academy enjoys academicÂ· freedom to impose disciplinary measures and punishment as it deems fit:
The schools' power to instill discipline in their students is subsumed in their academic freedom and that "the establishment of rules governing university-student relations, particularly those pertaining to student discipline, may be regarded as vital, not merely to the smooth and efficient operation of the institution, but to its very survival." As a Bohemian proverb puts it: "A school without discipline is like a mill without water." Insofar as the water turns the mill, so does the school's disciplinary power assure its right to survive and continue operating. In this regard, the Court has always recognized the right of schools to impose disciplinary sanctions, which includes the power to dismiss or expel, on students who violate disciplinary rules.
[24]
 (Citations omitted)
Nevertheless, in 
Villar v. Technological Institute of the Philippines
,
[25]
 this Court clarified that the discretion of educational institutions is not absolute as to impinge on the students' constitutional rights. In 
Villar
, the petitioners took part in an assembly and were subsequently denied admission by the university, which claimed that the students flunked. In finding that some of the petitioners did not violate the school's academic standards, this Court ruled that while the institution can deny admission to students with academic deficiencies, the academic freedom it enjoys cannot be used to discriminate against qualified students who exercise their constitutional rights.
[26]
 This Court held:
The academic freedom enjoyed by "institutions of higher learning" includes the right to set academic standards to determine under what circumstances failing grades suffice for the expulsion of students. Once it has done so, however, that standard should be followed meticulously. It cannot be utilized to discriminate against those students who exercise their constitutional rights to peaceable assembly and free speech. If it does so, then there is a legitimate grievance by the students thus prejudiced, their right to the equal protection clause being disregarded.
[27]
Similarly, in 
Isabelo, Jr. v. Perpetual Help College of Rizal, Inc.
,
[28]
 this Court ruled against the university's refusal to admit the petitioner as its, student. Explaining that "academic freedom has never been meant to be an unabridged license[,]" it held that the university cannot hide behind the shroud of academic freedom to act arbitrarily in dismissing a student.
[29]
 
Malabanan v. Ramento
,
[30]
 
Arreza v. Gregorio Araneta University
,
[31]
 
Guzman v. National University
,
[32]
 
Non v. Dames II
[33]
 were ruled in the same vein.
An academic institution's discretion applies not only to the admission and dismissal of its students, but also to its decision to confer academic recognition. In 
Morales v. Board of Regents
,
[34]
 the petitioner was a University of the Philippines student who questioned the university's decision not to grant her the academic distinction of 
cum laude
 due to a contested grade computation. In upholding this decision, this Court emphasized that "the wide sphere of autonomy given to universities in the exercise of academic freedom extends to the right to confer academic honors." It held:
[The] exercise of academic freedom grants the University the exclusive discretion to determine to whom among Its graduates it shall confer academic recognition, based on its established standards. And the courts may not interfere with such exercise of discretion unless there is a clear showing that the University has arbitrarily and capriciously exercised its judgment. Unlike the UP Board of Regents that has the competence and expertise in granting honors to graduating students of the University, courts do not have the competence to constitute themselves as an Honor's Committee and substitute their judgment for that of the University officials.
[35]
Nevertheless, this Court has affirmed in the past the State's power to intrude-in very limited circumstances-into the admission process of schools imbued with public interest. Specifically, students applying to medical schools have to take and pass a state-sponsored examination as a condition to their admission.
In 
Tablarin v. Gutierrez
,
[36]
 the petitioners questioned the constitutionality of the National Medical Admission Test, a uniform admission test required by the Board of Medical Education and administered by the Center for Educational Measurement.
[37]
 They sought to declare as unconstitutional portions of Republic Act No. 2382 and Ministry of Education, Culture, and Sports Order No. 52-1985, which require "the taking and passing of the [National Medical Admission Test] as a condition for securing certificates of eligibility for admission."
[38]
 The order characterizes the test as an aptitude examination that aims to upgrade "the selection of applicants for admission into the medical schools and . . . to improve the quality of medical education in the country."
[39]
In denying the Petition, this Court ruled that the requirement of taking and passing the National Medical Admission Test was a valid exercise of police power. It found the objectives cited in the order to be valid. It also found a reasonable relation between prescribing the test as a condition for admission to medical schools and securing the health and safety of the general public.
[40]
Tablarin
 characterized state-sponsored admission tests as an exercise of police power that advanced legitimate interests.
This was further elaborated in 
Department of Education, Culture, and Sports v. San Diego
,
[41]
 the issue of which also revolved around the National Medical Admission Test. In that case, the petitioners were students who questioned the three-flunk rule, which states that students may only take the exam thrice, and are barred from taking it again after three (3) successive failures.
[42]
 They argued that this limitation violates their constitutional right to academic freedom and education.
The trial court first ruled in favor of petitioners, finding that the threeÂ­ flunk rule was an arbitrary exercise of police power.
[43]
 However, this Court reversed its decision and, reiterating its pronouncements in 
Tablarin
, found the National Medical Admission Test to be a valid exercise of police power:
The subject of the challenged regulation is certainly within the ambit of the police power. It is the right and indeed the responsibility of the State to insure that the medical profession is not infiltrated by incompetents to whom patients may unwarily entrust their lives and health.
The method employed by the challenged regulation is not irrelevant to the purpose of the law nor is it arbitrary or oppressive. The three-flunk rule is intended to insulate the medical schools and ultimately the medical profession from the intrusion of those not qualified to be doctors.
While every person is entitled to aspire to be a doctor, he does not have a constitutional right to be a doctor. This is true of any other calling in which the public interest is involved; and the closer the link, the longer the bridge to one's ambition. The State has the responsibility to harness its human resources and to see to it that they are not dissipated or, no less worse, not used at all. These resources must be applied in a manner that will best promote the common good while also giving the individual a sense of satisfaction.
A person cannot insist on being a physician if he will be a menace to his patients. If one who wants to be a lawyer may prove better as a plumber, he should be so advised and adviced (sic). Of course, he may not be forced to be a plumber, but on the other hand he may not force his entry into the bar. By the same token, a student who has demonstrated promise as a pianist cannot be shunted aside to take a course in nursing, however appropriate this career may be for others.
The right to quality education invoked by the private respondent is not absolute. The Constitution also provides that "every citizen has the right to choose a profession or course of study, subject to fair, reasonable and equitable admission and academic requirements."
The private respondent must yield to the challenged rule and give way to those better prepared. Where even those who have qualified may still not be accommodated in our already crowded medical schools, there is all the more reason to bar those who, like him, have been tested and found wanting.
The contention that the challenged rule violates the equal protection clause is not well-taken. A law does not have to operate with equal force on all persons or things to be conformable to Article III, Section 1 of the Constitution.
There can be no question that a substantial distinction exists between medical students and other students who are not subjected to the National Medical Admission Test and the three-flunk rule. The medical profession directly affects the very lives of the people, unlike other careers which, for this reason, do not require more vigilant regulation. The accountant, for example, while belonging to an equally respectable profession, does not hold the same delicate responsibility as that of the physician and so need not be similarly treated.
[44]
 (Citation omitted)
Department of Education, Culture, and Sports
 highlighted the special character of the medical profession, which justifies the three-flunk rule in the National Medical Admission Test in force at that time. As the medical profession "directly affects the very lives of the people,"
[45]
 this Court found that the three-flunk rule was valid insofar as it seeks to admit only those who are academically qualified to study in a medical school.
Tablarin
 and 
Department of Education, Culture, and Sports
 both resolved issues on the right to quality education and the right to choose a profession vis-a-vis the State's power to regulate admission to schools through a uniform aptitude test. In both cases, this Court found that administering the National Medical Admission Test was a reasonable exercise of police power.
However, it should be remembered that the parties in these cases were student-applicants who asserted their right to the course of study of their own choosing. The issue of institutional academic freedom in relation to a standardized test imposed by the State was not discussed. The medical schools covered by the order that institutionalizes the National Medical Admission Test have not asserted their exclusive right to determine who may be admitted to their institutions pursuant to their academic freedom.
Reyes v. Court of Appeals
[46]
 comes close. There, students of the University of the Philippines College of Medicine questioned the National Medical Admission Test's cutoff grade for admission, which was prescribed by the college faculty but was not approved by the University Council. The faculty, for its part, asserted institutional academic freedom in arguing that it had the power to determine the admission requirements of the college. However, this Court found that this power was vested in the University Council, not the faculty:
Under the UP Charter, the power to fix admission requirements is vested in the University Council of the autonomous campus which is composed of the President of the University of the Philippines and of all instructors holding the rank of professor, associate professor or assistant professor (Section 9, Act 1870). Consequently, the UC alone has the right to protest against any unauthorized exercise of its power. Petitioners cannot impugn these BOR directives on the ground of academic freedom inasmuch as their rights as university teachers remain unaffected.
[47]
Reyes
, therefore, resolved an issue that was not so much a question of whether the State violated institutional academic freedom, but whether it was the proper academic unit that asserted this freedom.
The crucial question before this Court now is whether the stateÂ­-sponsored Philippine Law School Admission Test, in its current configuration, violates institutional academic freedom.
I agree with the majority that it does.
As found by the majority, the Philippine Law School Admission Test, unlike the National Medical Admission Test, violates institutional academic freedom
[48]
 insofar as it prescribes a passing score that must be followed by law schools.
[49]
 Failure to reach the passing score will disqualify the examinee from admission to any Philippine law school. This is because a Certificate of Eligibility is necessary for enrollment as a first year law student.
[50]
 Respondent Legal Education Board, which administers the test, only allows law schools to impose additional requirements for admission, but passing the test is still mandatory.
[51]
 The failure of law schools to abide by these requirements exposes them to administrative sanctions.
[52]
In contrast, failure to achieve a certain score in the National Medical Admission Test no longer disqualifies an examinee from applying to all medical schools. For one, test scores are reported with a corresponding percentile rank that ranges from 1 to 99+. It "indicates the percentage of [National Medical Admission Test] examinees who have [test] scores the same as or lower than the examinee."
[53]
 This percentile rank is evaluated by the medical schools against the cutoff grade that they themselves determine.
[54]
 Hence, the percentile rank cutoff is only a "minimum score that qualifies an examinee as a bonafide applicant for admission into his/her preferred medical school."
[55]
 The test score only determines the available medical schools where a person may apply; the higher the score, the more options the applicant has.
Thus, I agree with the majority's characterization that the Philippine Law School Admission Test employs a "totalitarian scheme"
[56]
 that leaves the actions of law schools entirely dependent on the test results.
[57]
 It usurps the right of law schools to determine the admission requirements for its would-be students-ultimately infringing on the institutional academic freedom they possess, as guaranteed by the Constitution.
II
However, the majority ruled that the Philippine Law School Admission Test is unconstitutional only insofar as it is a mandatory requirement for the law schools' admissions processes.
I disagree. The Philippine Law School Admission Test-or, for that matter, any national admission test-even if not made mandatory, still infringes on academic freedom.
Academic freedom as a constitutional right should be interpreted with the understanding that this guarantee lies within the broader sphere of the Bill of Rights.
Academic discussions and other forms of scholarship are manifestations and extensions of an individual's thoughts and beliefs. Thus, academic freedom is constitutionally granted to students, faculty, and academic institutions alike:
Notwithstanding the increasingly broad reach of academic freedom and the current emphasis on the essentiality of autonomy for academic institutions, the freedom of individual faculty members against control of thought or utterance from either within or without the employing institutions remains the core of the matter. 
If this freedom exists and reasonably adequate academic administration and methods of faculty selection prevail, intellectual interchange and pursuit of knowledge are secured.
 A substantial degree of institutional autonomy is both a usual prerequisite and a normal consequence of such a state of affairs. . . . Hence the main concern over developing and maintaining academic freedom in this country has focused upon encouragement and protection of the freedom of the faculty member.
[58]
 (Emphasis supplied)
Academic freedom is anchored on the recognition that academic institutions perform a social function and its business is conducted for the common good; that is, it is a necessary tool for critical inquiry of truth and its free exposition. The guarantee of academic freedom is complementary to freedom of expression and of the mind.
Thus, to foster an environment of critical discussion and inquiry, the faculty must be given a degree of independence from their employers, and universities must have a degree of independence from the State.
[59]
 This constitutional protection guaranteed for the students, faculty, and institutions is not merely a job-related concern or an institutional interest; rather, it "promotes First Amendment values of general concern to all citizens in a democracy."
[60]
As eloquently discussed by then Justice Felix Makasiar in his dissenting opinion in 
Garcia
, blows against academic freedom inevitably strike at the core of freedom of expression:
The cardinal article of faith of our democratic civilization is the preservation and enhancement of the dignity and worth of the human personality. It was Mr. Justice Frankfurter himself who emphasized that man's "inviolate character" should be "protected to the largest possible extent in his thoughts and in his beliefs as the citadel of his person", so that the individual can fully develop himself and achieve complete fulfillment. His freedom to seek his own happiness would mean nothing if the same were not given sanctuary "against the assaults of opportunism, the expediency of the passing hour, the erosion of small encroachments and the scorn and derision of those who have no patience with general principles".
. . . This individual freedom and right to happiness should be recognized and respected not only by the State but also by enterprises authorized by the State to operate; for as Laski stressed: "Without freedom of the mind . . . a man has no protection in our social order. He may speak wrongly or foolishly, . . . Yet a denial of his right . . . is a denial of his happiness. Thereby he becomes an instrument of other people's ends, not himself an end".
As Justice Holmes pronounced, "the ultimate good desired is better reached by free trade in ideas-that the best test of truth is the power of the thought to get itself accepted in the competition of the market; and that truth is the only ground upon which their wishes safely can be carried out".
The human mind is by nature an inquiring mind, whether of the very young or of the very old or in-between; for freedom of speech in the words of John Milton is the "liberty to know, to utter, and to argue freely according to conscience above all liberties."
What is involved here is not merely academic freedom of the higher institutions of learning as guaranteed by Section 8(2) of Article [X]V of the 1973 Constitution. The issue here strikes at the broader freedom of expression of the individual - the very core of human liberty.
Even if the term "academic freedom" were to be limited to institutions of higher learning - which to the mind of Dr. Vicente Sinco, an eminent authority in Constitutional Law, is the right of the university as an institution, not the academic freedom of the university professor - the term "institutions of higher learning" contained in the aforecited provision of our New Constitution comprehends not only the faculty and the college administrators but also the members of the student body. While it is true that the university professor may have the initiative and resourcefulness to pursue his own research and formulate his conclusions concerning the problem of his own science or subject, the motivation therefor may be provoked by questions addressed to him by his students. In this respect, the student - specially a graduate student - must not be restrained from raising questions or from challenging the validity of dogmas, whether theological or not. The true scholar never avoids, but on the contrary welcomes and encourages, such searching questions even if the same will have the tendency to uncover his own ignorance. It is not the happiness and self-fulfillment of the professor alone that are guaranteed. 
The happiness and full development of the curious intellect of the student are protected by the narrow guarantee of academic freedom and more so by the broader right of free expression, which includes free speech and press, and academic freedom.
[61]
 (Emphasis supplied, citations omitted)
Academic freedom is intertwined with intellectual liberty. It is inseparable from one's freedom of thought, speech, expression, and the press.
[62]
 Thus, the institutions' and individuals' right to pursue learning must be "free from internal and external interference or pressure."
[63]
In American jurisprudence, the protection of academic freedom has been identified as a subset of the First Amendment.
[64]
 In 
Sweezy v. New Hampshire
,
[65]
 the U.S. Supreme Court tied the First Amendment values of critical inquiry and search for truth to the autonomy of academic institutions and its faculty from the State's intrusion:
No one should underestimate the vital role in a democracy that is played by those who guide and train our youth. To impose any strait jacket upon the intellectual leaders in our colleges and universities would imperil the future of our Nation. No field of education is so thoroughly comprehended by man that new discoveries cannot yet be made. Particularly is that true in the social sciences, where few, if any, principles are accepted as absolutes. Scholarship cannot flourish in an atmosphere of suspicion and distrust. Teachers and students must always remain free to inquire, to study and to evaluate, to gain new maturity and understanding; otherwise, our civilization will stagnate and die.
[66]
Freedom of expression is a cognate of academic freedom. Hence, the zealous protection accorded to freedom of expression must necessarily be reflected in the level of protection that covers academic freedom. Any form of State intrusion against academic freedom must be treated suspect.
Central to the resolution of this case is the freedom of academic institutions, particularly law schools, to determine 
who may be admitted to study
. As part of their academic self-government, law schools are given the discretion to come up with an autonomous decision on their admission policies, including the examination they will administer. A state-sponsored examination like the Philippine Law School Admission Test, which tends to control the internal affairs of academic institutions, runs afoul of that essential freedom.
Moreover, according to the majority, "[t]he subject of the [Philippine Law School Admission Test] is to improve the quality of legal education."
[67]
 Thus, under the State's police power, the imposition of the test is justified by the State's interest to improve the quality of legal education.
[68]
I view that the thesis that changing the admissions policy will improve the quality of law schools is non-sequitur.
The standards for choosing who to admit are entirely different from the standards for maintaining or ensuring the quality of instruction. The process of admitting students is unrelated to the quality of the law school. Even if it were indeed related, respondent Legal Education Board has done no specific study to justify the administration of the Philippine Law School Admission Test. Test makers even admit that admission tests do not measure "smartness."
[69]
 It is not an accurate barometer of merit, but only a measure of correlation between the exam scores and the students' first-year grades.
[70]
 At best, respondent Legal Education Board relied on anecdotal evidence, which, in academic circles, is the worst way to justify policy. The Philippine Law School Admission Test is, therefore, arbitrary.
A closer look shows that the Philippine Law School Admission Test does not merely recommend, but dictates on law schools who are qualified to be admitted. By prescribing a passing score and predetermining who may enroll in law schools, the State forces its judgment on the institutions, when it has no business doing so. Any governmental attempt to dictate upon schools the composition of their studentry undermines their institutional academic freedom.
[71]
Moreover, the final basis of the administration of the Philippine Law School Admission Test, regardless of whether there have been consultants, will always rest on the government-appointed members of respondent Legal Education Board. Yet, as this case shows, the Chair of the Board may not have the postgraduate academic, teaching, or college or university administrator credentials. Being government appointees, its members are prone to influences by their appointing power, consequently undermining the academe's most significant roles: to inquire into the truth, to powerfully disseminate this truth, and to speak this truth to power.
In the United States, admission to law schools is usually preceded by taking a standardized aptitude examination called the Law School Admission Test. While it may seem similar to our own test, important distinctions must be made. First, the U.S. Law School Admission Test is not a state-sponsored exam. It is administered by the Law School Admission Council, a private nonprofit that promotes "quality, access, and equity in law and education[.]"
[72]
 Hence, the Law School Admission Test is a mere creation of law schools.
[73]
In some cases, an aspiring student may even be accepted to a law school without taking the test.
[74]
 Thus, unlike in the Philippines, the adherence of U.S. law schools to the Law School Admission Test is purely voluntary. The test results may be used merely as one (1) of the many criteria for admission, which a law school may determine for itself.
[75]
 The Law School Admission Test is designed merely as a tool to help law schools make sound admission decisions.
[76]
The Philippine Law School Admission Test, by contrast, undermines the critical function of law schools to provide pieces of truth that may ripen into critique of government. The State's intrusion, whatever form it may be, stifles the ability of the academic institution to be critical. This Court should remain ever so vigilant on any infraction of the Constitution disguised with good intentions.
Law schools are the principal institutions that have the space to analyze, deconstruct, and even critique our laws and jurisprudence. They not only teach doctrine, but examine its fundamentals.
The kind of freedom of expression contained in academic freedom is different from political expression. Within political or creative spaces, freedom of expression takes an almost unqualified immunity. Any thought, whether or not it is hated by the dominant, finds protection without regard to its slant or falsity. In the sphere of political debate, falsehoods are platforms for testing reason and providing opportunities to publicly advocate what is true persuasively.
On the other hand, within the academe, falsities in method and content are deliberately rooted out, exposed, and marginalized so that the public debate is enriched, whether among the institution's students or the world beyond its walls. Academic freedom is the constitutional canon that protects this space from politics. It is the freedom that assures academic intellectual debate without fear of any governmental intervention of any kind, be it coercive or suggestive.
Government-sponsored standardized admission tests infringe on this freedom without reason.
III
Due process is guaranteed under our Constitution. Its Article III, Section 1 states:
SECTION 1. No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law[.]
The due process clause is commonly referred to as the "right to be let alone" from the State's interference.
[77]
 The essence of due process is the freedom from arbitrariness. In 
Morfe v. Mutuc
:
[78]
"There is no controlling and precise definition of due process. It furnishes though a standard to which governmental action should conform in order that deprivation of life, liberty or property, in each appropriate case, be valid. What then is the standard of due process which must exist both as a procedural and as substantive requisite to free the challenged ordinance, or any governmental action for that matter, from the imputation of legal infirmity sufficient to spell its doom? It is responsiveness to the supremacy of reason, obedience to the dictates of justice. Negatively put, arbitrariness is ruled out and unfairness avoided. To satisfy the due process requirement, official action, to paraphrase Cardozo, must not outrun the bounds of reason and result in sheer oppression. Due process is thus hostile to any official action marred by lack of reasonableness. Correctly has it been identified as freedom from arbitrariness. It is the embodiment of the sporting idea of fair play. It exacts fealty 'to those strivings for justice' and judges the act of officialdom of whatever branch 'in the light of reason drawn from considerations of fairness that reflect [democratic] traditions of legal and political thought.' It is not a narrow or 'technical conception with fixed content unrelated to time, place and circumstances,' decisions based on such a clause requiring a 'close and perceptive inquiry into fundamental principles of our society.' Questions of due process are not to be treated narrowly or pedantically in slavery to form or phrases."
[79]
 (Citation omitted)
Due process is the protection of the sphere of individual autonomy. It aims to "prevent arbitrary governmental encroachment against the life, liberty and property of individuals."
[80]
 Thus, it imposes a burden on the government to observe two (2) separate limits: (1) procedural and (2) substantive due process. In 
White Light Corporation v. City of Manila
:
[81]
The due process guaranty has traditionally been interpreted as imposing two related but distinct restrictions on government, "procedural due process" and "substantive due process". Procedural due process refers to the procedures that the government must follow before it deprives a person of life, liberty, or property. Procedural due process concerns itself with government action adhering to the established process when it makes an intrusion into the private sphere. Examples range from the form of notice given to the level of formality of a hearing.
If due process were confined solely to its procedural aspects, there would arise absurd situation of arbitrary government action, provided the proper formalities are followed. Substantive due process completes the protection envisioned by the due process clause. It inquires whether the government has sufficient justification for depriving a person of life, liberty, or property.
The question of substantive due process, more so than most other fields of law, has reflected dynamism in progressive legal thought tied with the expanded acceptance of fundamental freedoms. Police power, traditionally awesome as it may be, is now confronted with a more rigorous level of analysis before it can be upheld. The vitality though of constitutional due process has not been predicated on the frequency with which it has been utilized to achieve a liberal result for, after all, the libertarian ends should sometimes yield to the prerogatives of the State. Instead, the due process clause has acquired potency because of the sophisticated methodology that has emerged to determine the proper metes and bounds for its application.
[82]
 (Citations omitted)
Substantive due process answers the question of whether "the government has an adequate reason for taking away a person's life, liberty, or property."
[83]
 To pass this test, the State must provide a sufficient justification for enforcing a governmental regulation.
[84]
While the State's intrusion is not absolutely proscribed, due process requires that the intrusion on an individual's right to life, liberty, and property is neither arbitrary nor unreasonable.
[85]
 In 
Ichong v. Hernandez
:
[86]
The due process clause has to do with the reasonableness of legislation enacted in pursuance of the police power, Is there public interest, a public purpose; is public welfare involved? Is the Act reasonably necessary for the accomplishment of the legislature's purpose; is it not unreasonable, arbitrary or oppressive? Is there sufficient foundation or reason in connection with the matter involved; or has there not been a capricious use of the legislative power? Can the aims conceived be achieved by the means used, or is it not merely an unjustified interference with private interest? These are the questions that we ask when the due process test is applied.
The conflict, therefore, between police power and the guarantees of due process and equal protection of the laws is more apparent than real. Properly related, the power and the guarantees are supposed to coexist. The balancing is the essence or, shall it be said, the indispensable means for the attainment of legitimate aspirations of any democratic society. There can be no absolute power, whoever exercise it, for that would be tyranny. Yet there can neither be absolute liberty, for that would mean license and anarchy. So the State can deprive persons of life, liberty and property, provided there is due process of law[.]
[87]
When governmental action is checked against the due process requirement under the Constitution - particularly substantive due process - it must be shown that such action was neither arbitrary nor unreasonable. Respondent failed to show this.
The creation of the Philippine Law School Admission Test was not based on scientific research. The State has not given any justification for the propriety of conducting the examination, other than it being copied from the Law School Admission Test administered in the United States. The Chairperson of respondent Legal Education Board, during the oral arguments, admitted to this:
ASSOCIATE JUSTICE LEONEN:
Okay, next. Was there a study conducted by the LEB prior to imposing the national test relating to the correlation of passing the test and passing the bar? Because according to you the declaration of policy states, to improve the quality of the bar. Or was this anecdotal in nature? And if there is a test, a scientific study, will you be able to provide the Court? Was there a study done prior to imposing the national exam in an exclusionary character prior to giving the test?
. . . .
DEAN AQUENDE:
We have none, Your Honor, but we relied on the LSAT study, Your Honor, in the United States.
JUSTICE LEONEN:
Yes, the LSAT study conducted by the United States. We are a different country and you are saying that you looked at a different culture so what they did in India, in America, in Canada, maybe even in Japan but not Filipinos, and the Filipinos have particular needs in our archipelago. Certainly, Tagum is different from Siargao, different from Baguio City, different from Cebu, so, you are saying that the LEB imposed this without, isn't this arbitrary, Chair?
DEAN AQUENDE:
We looked at, Your Honor, at the result or the correlation result of the law school qualifying test administered by the CEM and in that particular study, the correlation is that the . . . (interrupted)
. . . .
JUSTICE LEONEN:
You said that it was correlation, what was the degree of confidence?
DEAN AQUENDE:
I do not have right now.
JUSTICE LEONEN:
Yes, probably you can provide us with a copy.
DEAN AQUENDE:
Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE LEONEN:
Because in order not to be a grave abuse of discretion, it must be reasonable.
DEAN AQUENDE:
Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE LEONEN:
Considering, Chair, that this affects a freedom and a primordial freedom at that, freedom of expression, academic freedom, the way we teach our, as Justice Andy Reyes pointed out, the way we teach law to our citizens and therefore, to me, the level of scrutiny should not be cursory. The level of scrutiny must be deep and I would think it would apply strict scrutiny in this regard. Therefore, if there was no study that supported it, then perhaps, may be stricken down as unreasonable and therefore, a grave abuse of discretion . . . .
. . . .
JUSTICE LEONEN:
. . . . the English proficiency that you mentioned, what are your statistics on that?
DEAN AQUENDE:
The . . . . (interrupted)
JUSTICE LEONEN:
That law schools are admitting law students that do not have English proficiency . . . .
DEAN AQUENDE:
That ties up, Your Honor, with the public interest that we are looking at and that is . . . . (interrupted)
JUSTICE LEONEN:
Yes, yes, what are your statistics on that?
DEAN AQUENDE:
. . . . and that is the weigh stage . . . . (interrupted)
JUSTICE LEONEN:
What are your numbers?
DEAN AQUENDE:
Actually, Your Honor, it's the weigh stage of the human capital resulting problem . . . . (interrupted)
JUSTICE LEONEN:
I'm not asking about the concept.
DEAN AQUENDE:
. . . . in the bar examination, Your Honor.
JUSTICE LEONEN:
What are your numbers?
DEAN AQUENDE:
It's the bar examination, Your Honor, that seventy-five percent (75%) of all the . . . . (interrupted)
JUSTICE LEONEN:
You see all the examinations?
DEAN AQUENDE:
Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE LEONEN:
You mean to say, those that flunked the exams is because of English?
DEAN AQUENDE:
No, Your Honor, but that is the competency . . . . (interrupted)
JUSTICE LEONEN:
In other words, in looking at the law schools, you made a claim that the English proficiency of undergraduates going into law schools is deteriorating, correct? And because you are an academic body, you should have a scientific study to back yourself up? Can you submit that to the Court? Have you made that study?
DEAN AQUENDE:
Which particular . . . . (interrupted)
JUSTICE LEONEN:
You cannot operate to supervise academic institutions deep in science on the basis of anecdotal references. That would be unreasonable. That is grave abuse of discretion.
DEAN AQUENDE:
No. Your Honor, please, if the question is . . . . (interrupted)
JUSTICE LEONEN:
You said it was English proficiency, logic, correct? That's why you imposed this exam. By the way, Chair, how many law schools are there?
DEAN AQUENDE:
One hundred twenty-two (122) law schools, Your Honor.
JUSTICE LEONEN:
Have you taught in all those environments?
DEAN AQUENDE:
None, not, Your Honor.
JUSTICE LEONEN:
In fact, have you taught in more than five law schools?
DEAN AQUENDE:
No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE LEONEN:
How many law schools have you taught in?
DEAN AQUENDE:
Just two (2), Your Honor.
JUSTICE LEONEN:
Just two (2), and you make a conclusion based on your experience in two (2) law schools multiplied by the number of experiences of all your members of the Board with 120? Shouldn't you have done a scientific study on English proficiency of incoming first year of law schools at the very least before you put in this policy so that it becomes reasonable for us?
DEAN AQUENDE:
Well, we looked at the LSAT correlation, Your Honor.
[88]
Respondent Legal Education Board has not conducted any scientific and empirical study prior to its decision to impose a national standardized test for the admission of students in law schools. All that it has as basis is the study for the Law School Admission Test of the United States. There was no showing of how this foreign experience is applicable, or even relevant, to the Philippine context. For lack of any substantial basis, the administration of the Philippine Law School Admission Test is arbitrary.
Moreover, the Philippine Law School Admission Test transgresses due process for being unreasonable. At the core of this test is the enforcement of a written exam that supposedly sifts and sets apart individuals who are likely to survive law school. The exclusionary result is based on a single criterion-if the applicants pass the written exam, they are deemed qualified. There is no other basis used for the evaluation of applicants. Through the Philippine Law School Admission Test, the government imposes a single determinant to ascertain who can pursue legal education. This is insufficient to hurdle the requirement of due process. Reasonableness demands that a multi-varying approach is used in evaluating law school applicants.
American jurisprudence sheds more light on this. In 
Grutter v. Bollinger
,
[89]
 the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the University of Michigan Law School's use of an applicant's race as among the criteria in its admission policy. It agreed with the use of race as a factor in its admission decisions, as it serves a "compelling interest in attaining a diverse student body."
[90]
In 
Grutter
, the law school's admission policy sought to admit more students from disadvantaged backgrounds, not to meet a desired quota for diversity, but to enroll a "critical mass" of minority students. Its concept of critical mass is anchored on the important educational benefits that flow from having a diverse studentry. The law school used race as one (1) of the criteria in its admission policy to avoid a monolithic student demographic that is typically admitted by traditional admissions processes.
In upholding the policy, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the law school's educational judgment that diversity is essential to its educational mission must be respected, and that universities must be given' a degree of deference when it comes to academic decisions:
In announcing the principle of student body diversity as a compelling state interest, Justice Powell invoked our cases recognizing a constitutional dimension, grounded in the First Amendment, of educational autonomy: "The freedom of a university to make its own judgments as to education includes the selection of its student body." From this premise, Justice Powell reasoned that by claiming "the right to select those students who will contribute the most to the 'robust exchange of ideas,'" a university "seek[s] to achieve a goal that is of paramount importance in the fulfillment of its mission." Our conclusion that the Law School has a compelling interest in a diverse student body is informed by our view that attaining a diverse student body is at the heart of the Law School's proper institutional mission, and that "good faith" on the part of a university is "presumed" absent "a showing to the contrary."
[91]
 (Citations omitted)
In 
Grutter
, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld a holistic evaluation of an applicant by considering several factors such as academic ability, talents, experiences, including other information through a personal statement, letters of recommendation, together with the applicant's undergraduate grade point average, Law School Admission Test score, and other "soft variables," including the applicant's racial and ethnic status. In effect, the law school affords an individualized consideration to all applicants regardless of race. There is no policy of automatic acceptance or rejection based on a single variable.
In this case, by enforcing an arbitrary and unreasonable measure in the law schools' admission process, the government violates the applicants' right to due process.
The choice of pursuing an education is within the ambit of one's right to life and liberty. Liberty includes the "right to exist and the right to be freeÂ· from arbitrary restraint or servitude."
[92]
 It embraces the right of individuals, to enjoy the faculties they are endowed with such as the right to live, right to be married, right to choose a profession, and the right to pursue an education.
[93]
 In 
City of Manila v. Laguio, Jr.
:
[94]
While the Court has not attempted to define with exactness the liberty . . . guaranteed [by the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments], the term denotes not merely freedom from bodily restraint but also the right of the individual to contract, to engage in any of the common occupations of life, to acquire useful knowledge, to marry, establish a home and bring up children, to worship God according to the dictates of his own conscience, and generally to enjoy those privileges long recognized . . . as essential to the orderly pursuit of happiness by free men. In a Constitution for a free people, there can be no doubt that the meaning of "liberty" must be broad indeed.
[95]
In my concurring opinion in 
Samahan ng mga Progresibong Kabataan v. Quezon City
:
[96]
Speaking of life and its protection does not merely entail ensuring biological subsistence. It is not just a proscription against killing. Likewise, speaking of liberty and its protection does not merely involve a lack of physical restraint. The objects of the constitutional protection of due process are better understood dynamically and from a frame of consummate human dignity. They are likewise better understood integrally, operating in a synergistic frame that serves to secure a person's integrity.
"Life, liberty and property" is akin to the United Nations' formulation of "life, liberty, and security of person" and the American formulation of "life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness." As the American Declaration of Independence postulates, they are "unalienable rights" for which "[g]overnments are instituted among men" in order that they may be secured. Securing them denotes pursuing and obtaining them, as much as it denotes preserving them. The formulation is, thus, an aspirational declaration, not merely operating on factual gives but enabling the pursuit of ideals.
"Life," then, is more appropriately understood as the fullness of human potential: not merely organic, physiological existence, but consummate self-actualization, enabled and effected not only by freedom from bodily restraint but by facilitating an empowering existence. "Life and liberty," placed in the context of a constitutional aspiration, it then becomes the duty of the government to facilitate this empowering existence. This is not an inventively novel understanding but one that has been at the bedrock of our social and political conceptions.
[97]
 (Citations omitted)
Ultimately, the right to life is intertwined with the right to pursue an education. Right to life, after all, is not merely the right to exist, but the right to achieve the "fullness of human potential[.]"
[98]
 This is real in attaining a degree of one's own choice. Education does not only enhance and sharpen intellect, but also opens up better opportunities. It improves the quality of life. When a person obtains a degree, there is economic and social mobility. Thus, when the State interferes and prevents an individual from accessing education, it impliedly infringes on the right to life and liberty.
In the same vein, imposing an arbitrary and unreasonable government-sponsored standardized test violates the right to property. Applicants, forced to take the mandatory examination, are likewise required to pay testing fees. This means additional financial cost that acts as another unnecessary obstacle to aspiring law students.
Yet, more than the financial barrier, going through the bureaucracy of studying for, applying for, and actually taking the test also entails opportunity cost. This includes, among others, the foregone time, prospects, and other possibilities that could have been realized.
[99]
 These additional costs only serve as exclusionary measures that unreasonably weed out those who simply cannot afford them.
Thus, the Philippine Law School Admission Test must be struck down for infringing on the rights to life, liberty, and property without due process of law.
IV
Moreover, standardized tests as a measure of merit should be taken with a grain of salt. A meritocratic method based on these tests does not necessarily mean that the most qualified students are admitted.
[100]
 For one, meritocracy was originally a term of abuse, used to describe a "ludicrously unequal state."
[101]
 Rather than measure fairness, it disproportionately benefits those who are well-off.
[102]
 For another, entrance tests have historically been skewed in favor of elite applicants who have significant advantage and access to better education, resources, and wealth.
[103]
As Stanford Law professor Richard Banks concluded:
Differential access to achievement-related resources may occur at the level of a child's family, school, or neighborhood.
The relative achievement formulation of socioeconomic status would encompass family characteristics such as parental income, education, occupation, and wealth. A variety of studies have demonstrated positive relationships between early academic achievement and parental income, education, and occupation.
[104]
 (Citations omitted)
Merit is a manifestation of elitism. Meritocracy opposes democratization and opportunity for all.
[105]
Even if national standardized tests were non-exclusionary, and were designed only to guide law schools, harm still persists in their mandatory character. Obviously, they entail both financial and opportunity cost for the applicant. An admission exam like the Philippine Law School Admission Test presents another financial barrier for an applicant.
This Court cannot ignore the greater disparity that prevails among income classes, ethnicities, and even geographical differences. The cost of taking the Philippine Law School Admission Test creates an additional burden and prevents applicants from the middle to low-income strata from pursuing legal education. The test morphs into a selective mechanism that unduly favors the wealthy. Even if the results of the exams are non-Â­exclusionary, the costs virtually make the exam itself exclusionary.
Moreover, students with low scores in the national test, which was created without the participation of true academics who understand test metrics, will consider themselves inferior. Because the results are ranked, the test creates a stigma on those who received low scores and excludes them. A national standardized exam, even as a non-exclusionary list, when state-sponsored, creates an unnecessary hierarchy.
Besides, that a law school is producing good lawyers does not automatically mean that it is a good law school. On the contrary, having a standardized national admission exam hides the defects and inadequacies of a law school. Students who ranked high in the Philippine Law School Admission Test, but went on to study in a school that may not exactly have good standards of education, may still likely pass the bar examinations. This is because students who topped the Philippine Law School Admission Test are not a random sample. Right at the start, they have already enjoyed a good foundation of education and a conducive environment to excel, equipped with the advantage of financial resources.
[106]
Thus, the Philippine Law School Admission Test effectively screens applicants not on the basis of merit alone, but on the resources they possess. Through it, law schools are encouraged to work with better-equipped students. They are incentivized in catering to the elite in our society.
Ironically, we incentivize sloth among law schools.
Justice Clarence Thomas' (Justice Thomas) dissent in 
Grutter
 is likewise illuminating. Proposing that law schools must end their reliance on the Law School Admission Test, he suggested adopting different methods of admission "such as accepting all students who meet minimum qualifications,"
[107]
 instead of betting on the highest scores.
Justice Thomas questioned whether standardized admission tests are reliable in predicting the success of applicants in law school. He does not believe that the test serves any real educational significance, but is only used to admit high scorers. The test, he notes, translates to selectivity-a marker of elitism:
[T]here is much to be said for the view that the use of tests and other measures to "predict" academic performance is a poor substitute for a system that gives every applicant a chance to prove he can succeed in the study of law. The rallying cry that in the absence of racial discrimination in admissions there would be a true meritocracy ignores the fact that the entire process is poisoned by numerous exceptions to "merit."
[108]
Here in the Philippines, our education system's obsession with examination-based meritocracy must be tempered, not further celebrated. Legal education must not be an exclusive good for the elite. There must be a conscious move to eliminate the socio-economic barriers that cement this elitism. The Philippine Law School Admission Test does the exact opposite by reinforcing a faulty method that does not necessarily admit the most qualified students, but only favors the economically privileged.
National standardized admission tests reward this blind and corrosive meritocracy. Crudely rewarding merit without understanding its context undermines the constitutional goal of achieving social justice. Rewarding merit alone or privileging it results in more inequality.
There has never been a level playing field in basic, secondary, and tertiary education. In the first place, not all poor and rural students who enter basic education make it to college. Fewer still are those that finish their college degrees. Most of the poor rural students will not rank high in a national standardized test due to limited access to resources in their communities. This does not mean, however, that they are so mentally deficient that they will not make it in law school. Rather, the national standardized test will most likely exclude them because they will be put in the proverbial back of the line.
Those from privileged families, by contrast, are more likely to grow up in an environment that nurtures cognitive development.
[109]
 They have likely received social and cultural capital that propel them to do better in school.
[110]
 Chances are they attended good schools staffed with competent teachers and professionals, learning with other privileged students.
[111]
The inevitably low ranking of poor students adds to their burden. In the meantime, rich, privileged students will, as usual, get better chances. This situation only perpetuates the status quo, ultimately putting meritocracy as a barrier to the principle of equality.
[112]
On its surface, the contemporary idea of meritocracy is appealing because "it carries with it the idea of moving beyond where you start in life, of creative flourishing and fairness."
[113]
 But this understanding is a myth, as our system rewards through wealth and it increases inequality.
[114]
 Financially privileged students are way ahead of those who have much less, and any merit-based system will only serve to further highlight this privilege:
In this intergenerational relay race, children born to wealthy parents start at or near the finish line, while children born into poverty start behind everyone else. Those who are born close to the finish line do not need any merit to get ahead. They already are ahead, The poorest of the poor, however, need to traverse the entire distance to get to the finish line on the basis of merit alone. In this sense, meritocracy strictly applies only to the poorest of the poor; everyone else has at least some advantage of inheritance that places them ahead at the start of the race.
In comparing the effects of inheritance and individual merit on life outcomes, the effects of inheritance come first, then the effects of individual merit follow-not the other way around.
[115]
An educational system that rewards on the basis of loosely defined merits assumes an equality of educational opportunity.
[116]
 It fails to recognize that the most privileged in society are provided with much greater opportunities to succeed and fewer chances to fail compared with those from less privileged backgrounds.
[117]
All these privileges that are attached to a person simply by the circumstances of his or her birth snowball within an educational system that hides behind the sanitized concept of meritocracy. In truth, such concept only widens the existing economic, social, and cultural inequality.
It is, thus, inaccurate to use the results of a standardized test as proxies for measuring the capability of students to do well in law school. The competitive and individualistic meritocracy that standardized tests espouse rests on the neoliberal assumption that hard work and effort alone will result in success. It is, however, almost deliberately blind to the reality that the starting line for success is unequal, and the path toward it more challenging for those disfavored by the system. In reality, a national standardized test only rewards crude meritocracy. Meritocracy, then, disguises prejudice.
V
In this case, the majority declared unconstitutional several provisions of the Legal Education Reform Act and Memorandum Orders of respondent Legal Education Board. However, it essentially retained the Philippine Law School Admission Test. It ruled that Section 7(e) of the Legal Education Reform Act
[118]
 is faithful to the reasonable supervision and regulation clause under the Constitution. It found that the provision only empowers respondent Legal Education Board to prescribe minimum requirements, which does not equate to control.
[119]
Section 7(e) of the Legal Education Reform Act states:
SECTION 7. Powers and Functions. - For the purpose of achieving the objectives of this Act, the Board shall have the following powers and functions:
. . . .
(e) to prescribe minimum standards for law admission and minimum qualifications and compensation of faculty members[.]
The majority concludes that while the State may administer the Philippine Law School Admission Test, it should not be imposed on law schools as a mandatory part of their admission process.
[120]
 Relying on 
Tablarin
, it sustained admission tests as a legitimate exercise of the State's regulatory power.
[121]
I find that the majority's pronouncements readily allow unwarranted State incursion on academic freedom.
An educational institution's right to determine who to admit as its students is an integral part of its institutional academic freedom. It is absolute. Any form of State intrusion into an educational institution's admission policies, no matter how benign, should be rejected.
In this regard, I view that 
Tablarin
 and 
Department of Education, Culture, and Sports
[122]
 should be overturned. Just like the Philippine Law School Admission Test, the National Medical Admission Test, and any kind of government-sponsored standardized admission test-mandatory or notÂ­-should be rejected for infringing on academic freedom.
The State cannot sponsor an admission exam under the guise of prescribing minimum qualifications when, right from the start, it already excludes those who cannot pay to take the test.
Ultimately, the results of the Philippine Law School Admission Test will affect the schools' admission decisions. To recapitulate, its mandatory character means that if an applicant fails, he or she is disqualified from enrolling in any law school, even when a law school determines that the unsuccessful examinee should be admitted as its student. Removing its mandatory character, but retaining the test nonetheless, perpetuates the stigma that attaches to an applicant who passes but scores low relative to other examinees. Thus, the power of respondent Legal Education Board to implement the Philippine Law School Admission Test, even as a minimum requirement for admission, is already a demonstration of State control over the law schools.
The academic institutions' right to determine who they will admit to study remains among their four (4) essential freedoms. In ascertaining who to admit, law schools must have autonomy in establishing their own policies, including the examination that they will employ.
The Philippine Law School Admission Test presents an unwarranted intrusion into this essential freedom. The government's imposition of a passing score as a bar to admission is a violation of the institutions' academic freedom.
The rationale of this decision in relation to the significance of academic freedom in our jurisdiction also applies to the entire concept of the Legal Education Board.
The teaching of law as an academic degree is protected by Article XIV, Section 5(2)
[123]
 of the Constitution, which also relates to Article III, Section 4
[124]
 under the Bill of Rights. On the other hand, the requirements for a license to practice law is broadly covered by Article XIV, Section 5(3)
[125]
 of the Constitution, and more specifically as a power granted to this Court under Article VIII, Section 5(5).
[126]
The regulation on the teaching of law as an academic degree is different from the regulation on the practice of law as a profession. The former is an aspect of higher education leading to a degree, while the latter may require a degree, yet the degree alone does not qualify one to practice law.
Quality legal education should be guaranteed by the faculty and administration of a law school. A law school, on the other hand, may be part of a university or college. Thus, the law school is accountable to its academic councils for its approaches to teaching, qualifications and promotion of its professors, as well as the full contents of its curriculum.
The broad and ambiguous rubric of police power should not be an excuse to provide government oversight on purely academic matters, or evenÂ· academic matters that appear to be administrative issues. Academic supervision cannot be done by a statutorily appointed Legal Education Board restricting the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning which offer what amounts to a postgraduate degree. Legal education cannot be supervised in the way institutions offering pre-school or basic elementary education are supervised. The entire concept of the Legal Education Board-appointed public officials interfering with law schools' academic freedoms as if the appointment from an elective official gives them the academic expertise-is precisely what Article XIV, Section 5(2) of the Constitution proscribes.
The entire Legal Education Reform Act clearly violates the Constitution. It is, therefore, surprising that the majority is unwilling to strike it down. It is likewise astounding that the majority seems to put its trust on the evolution of law as an academic discipline to political appointees.
There are better ways to ensure the quality of legal education, none of which involves a super body similar to the Legal Education Board. While it appears to be a mere guidance for law schools, the State's infringement on academic freedom through the Philippine Law School Admission Test has far-reaching implications.
ACCORDINGLY
, I vote to 
GRANT
 the Petitions. The entire Republic Act No. 7662, or the Legal Education Reform Act, is unconstitutional.
[1]
 
Garcia v. Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
, 160-A Phil. 929, 943 (1975) [Per J. Fernando, En Banc].
[2]
 J. Makasiar, Dissenting Opinion in 
Garcia v. Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
, 160-A Phil. 929, 951 (1975) [Per J. Fernando, En Banc].
[3]
 160-A Phil. 929 (1975) [Per J. Fernando, En Banc].
[4]
 Id. at 943.
[5]
 The institutional academic freedom reflected in Garcia was reiterated in the later case of 
University of the Philippines v. Ayson
, 257 Phil. 580, 584-585 (1989) [Per J. Bidin, En Banc], where this Court held that the abolition of the UP College Baguio High School as a decision of the UP Board of Regents is within its exercise of academic freedom. Thus, as an "institution of higher learning enjoying academic freedom, the UP cannot be compelled to provide for secondary education."
[6]
 
Garcia v. Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
, 160-A Phil. 929, 944 (1975) [Per J. Fernando, En Banc].
[7]
 J. Teehankee, Concurring Opinion in 
Garcia v. Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
, 160-A Phil. 929, 949 (1975) [Per J. Fernando, En Banc].
[8]
 221 Phil. 601 (1985) [Per J. Cuevas, Second Division]. 
[9]
 Id. at 611-612.
[10]
 274 Phil. 414 (1991) [Per J. Medialdea, First Division].
[11]
 294 Phil. 654 (1993) [Per J. Romero, En Banc].
[12]
 Id. at 675.
[13]
 258-A Phil. 417 (1989) [Per J. Gancayco, First Division].
[14]
 Id. at 423-424.
[15]
 244 Phil. 8 (1988) [Per J. Paras, Second Division].
[16]
 205 Phil. 307 (1983) [Per J. Escolin, Second Division].
[17]
 300 Phil. 819 (1994) [Per J. Nocon, Second Division].
[18]
 697 Phil. 31 (2012) [Per J. Brion, Second Division].
[19]
 401 Phil. 431 (2000) [Per J. Kapunan, First Division].
[20]
 Id. at 455-456.
[21]
 197 Phil. 713 (1982) [Per J. Fernandez, Second Division].
[22]
 Id. at 724-726.
[23]
 754 Phil. 590 (2015) [Per J. Peralta, En Banc].
[24]
 Id. at 655-656.
[25]
 220 Phil. 379 (1985) [Per C.J. Fernando, En Banc].
[26]
 Id. at 384.
[27]
 Id.
[28]
 298 Phil. 382 (1993) [Per J. Vitug, En Banc].
[29]
 Id. at 387-388.
[30]
 214 Phil. 319 (1984) [Per C.J. Fernando, En Banc].
[31]
 221 Phil. 470 (1985) [Per C.J. Fernando, En Banc].
[32]
 226 Phil. 596 (1986) [Per J. Narvasa, En Banc].
[33]
 264 Phil. 98 (1990) [Per J. Cortes, En Banc].
[34]
 487 Phil. 449 (2004) [Per J. Chico-Nazario, Second Division].
[35]
 Id. at 474.
[36]
 236 Phil. 768 (1987) [Per J. Feliciano, En Banc].
[37]
 Id. at 774.
[38]
 Id.
[39]
 Id. at 776-777.
[40]
 Id. at 782.
[41]
 259 Phil. 1016 (1989) [Per J. Cruz, En Banc].
[42]
 Id. at 1018.
[43]
 Id. at 1019.
[44]
 Id. at 1021-1023.
[45]
 Id. at 1023.
[46]
 272 Phil. 241 (1991) [Per J. Medialdea, En Banc].
[47]
 Id. at 254.
[48]
 Ponencia, p. 85.
[49]
 Legal Education Board Memorandum Order No.7 (2016), par. 7.
[50]
 Legal Education Board Memorandum Order No. 7 (2016), par. 9.
[51]
 Legal Education Board Memorandum Order No.7 (2016), par. 11.
[52]
 Legal Education Board Memorandum Order No.7 (2016), par. 15.
[53]
 Center for Educational Measurement, Inc., 
National Medical Admission Test Bulletin of Information
 (2019), available at <
https://cem-inc.org.ph/nmat/files/upload/BOI_NMAT_Regular2019_web.pdf
> (last accessed on September 9, 2019).
[54]
 Commission on Higher Education Memorandum Order No. 03 (2003) delegates the determination of the National Medical Admission Test cutoff score to the respective medical schools. Available at <
https://ched.gov.ph/cmo-3-s-2003-2/
> (last visited on September 9, 2019).
[55]
 Center for Educational Measurement, Inc., 
National Medical Admission Test Bulletin of Information
, 6 (2019), available at <
https://www.cem-inc.org.ph/National Medical Admission Test/files/upload/BOI_National Medical Admission Test_Summer_2019.pdf
> (last accessed on September 9, 2019).
[56]
 Ponencia, p. 87.
[57]
 Id.
[58]
 Ralph F. Fuchs, 
Academic Freedom: Its Basic Philosophy, Function and History
, 28 LAW AND CONTEMPORARY PROBLEMS 431, 433 (1963), available at <
https://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2963&context=lcp
> (last visited on September 9, 2019).
[59]
 David M. Rabban, 
A Functional Analysis of "Individual" and "Institutional" Academic Freedom under the First Amendment
, 53 LAW AND CONTEMPORARY PROBLEMS 227, 230 (1990), available at <
https://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4057&context=lcp
> (last visited on September 9, 2019).
[60]
 Id.
[61]
 J. Makasiar, Dissenting Opinion in 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Technology
, 160-A Phil. 929, 954-956 (1975) [Per J. Fernando, En Banc].
[62]
 
Ateneo De Manila University v. Capulong
, 292 Phil. 654, 672-673 [Per J. Romero, En Banc].
[63]
 Id. at 673.
[64]
 See J. Douglas, Dissenting Opinion in 
Adler v. Board of Education
, 342 U.S. 485 (1952), where the U.S. Supreme Court first mentioned academic freedom as a constitutional right. In 
Adler
, Justice Douglas stated that "[t]he Constitution guarantees freedom of though and expression to everyone in our society. All are entitled to it; and none needs it more than the teacher. The public school is in most respects the cradle of our democracy . . . the impact of this kind of censorship in the public school system illustrates the high purpose of the First Amendment in freeing speech and thought from censorship; 
See also
 J. Frankfurter, Dissenting Opinion in 
Wieman v. Updegraff
, 344 U.S. 183 (1952).
[65]
 354 U.S. 234 (1957).
[66]
 Id. at 251.
[67]
 Ponencia, p. 81.
[68]
 Id.
[69]
 LANI GUINIER, THE TYRANNY OF THE MERITOCRACY 17-18 (2016).
[70]
 Id.
[71]
 David M. Rabban, 
A Functional Analysis of "Individual" and "Institutional" Academic Freedom under the First Amendment
, 53 LAW AND CONTEMPORARY PROBLEMS 227, 272 (1990), available at <
https://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4057&context=lcp
> (last visited on September 9, 2019).
[72]
 Law School Admission Council, About the Law School Admission Council, available at <
https://www.Isac.org/about
> (last accessed on September 9, 2019).
[73]
 Alex M. Johnson, Jr., 
The Destruction of the Holistic Approach to Admissions: The Pernicions Effects of Rankings
, 81 INDIANA LAW JOURNAL 322, 323 (2006). Available at <
http://ilj.law.indiana.edu/articles/81/81_1_Johnson.pdf
> (last visited on September 9, 2019).
[74]
 The Princeton Review, 
ABA Accredited Law School
, available at <
https://www.princetonreview.com/law-school-advice/law-school-accreditation
> (last accessed August 27, 2019).
[75]
 See Michelle J. Anderson, 
Legal Education Reform, Diversity, and Access to Justice
, 61RUTGERS LAW REVIEW 1014 (2009). Available at <
https://academicworks.cuny.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1169&context=cl_pubs
> (last visited on September 9, 2019). Even the Law School Admissions Council, which administers the LSAT, cautions law schools against over-reliance on LSAT scores in the admissions process.
[76]
 Id.
[77]
 
See Morfe v. Mutuc
, 130 Phil. 415 (1968) [Per J. Fernando, En Banc].
[78]
 Id.
[79]
 Id. at 432-433.
[80]
 
White Light Corporation v. City of Manila
, 596 Phil. 444, 461 (2009) [Per J. Tinga, En Banc].
[81]
 596 Phil. 444 (2009) [Per J. Tinga, En Banc].
[82]
 Id. at 461-462.
[83]
 
City of Manila v. Laguio, Jr.
, 495 Phil. 289, 311 (2005) [Per J. Tinga, En Banc].
[84]
 Id.
[85]
 
Ichong v. Hernandez
, 101 Phil. 1155, 1166 (1957) [Per J. Labrador, En Banc].
[86]
 101 Phil. 1155 (1957) [Per J. Labrador, En Banc].
[87]
 Id. at 1165.
[88]
 TSN dated March 5, 2019, pp. 171-179.
[89]
 539 U.S. 306 (2003).
[90]
 Id. at 329.
[91]
 
City of Manila v. Laguio, Jr.
, 495 Phil. 289, 316 (2005) [Per J. Tinga, En Banc].
[92]
 Id.
[93]
 Id.
[94]
 495 Phil. 289 (2005) [Per J. Tinga, En Banc].
[95]
 
City of Manila v. Laguio, Jr.
, 495 Phil. 289, 317 (2005) [Per J. Tinga, En Banc] 
citing Roth v. Board of Regents
, 408 U.S. 564 (1972).
[96]
 815 Phil. 1067 (2017) [Per J. Perlas-Bernabe, En Banc].
[97]
 Id. at 1142-1143.
[98]
 Id.
[99]
 
Racelis v. Spouses Javier
, G.R. No. 189609, January 29, 2018, <
http://elibrary.judiciary.gov.ph/thebookshelf/showdocs/1/63801
> [Per J. Leonen, Third Division].
[100]
 Id.
[101]
 Jo Littler, 
Meritocracy: the great delusion that ingrains inequality
, THE GUARDIAN, March 20, 2017, available at <
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/mar/20/meritocracy-inequality-theresa-may-donald-trump
> (last accessed on September 9, 2019).
[102]
 Id.
[103]
 Elise S. Brezis, 
The Effects of Elite Recruitment on Social Cohesion and Economic Development
 3 (2010), available at <
https://www.oecd.org/dev/pgd/46837524.pdf
> (last visited on September 9, 2019); and R. Richard Banks, 
Meritocratic Values and Racial Outcomes: Defending Class-Based College Admissions
, 79 N. C. L. REV. 1061, 1062 (2001), available at <
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=301300&download=yes
> (last  visited on September 9, 2019).
[104]
 R. Richard Banks, 
Meritocratic Values and Racial Outcomes: Defending Class-Based College Admissions
, 79 N. C. L. REV. 1061 (2001), available at <
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=283711
> (last visited on September 9, 2019).
[105]
 Elise S. Brezis, 
The Effects of Elite Recruitment on Social Cohesion and Economic Development
, 7 (2010), available at <
https://www.oecd.org/dev/pgd/46837524.pdf
> (last visited on September 9, 2019).
[106]
 Elise S. Brezis, 
The Effects of Elite Recruitment on Social Cohesion and Economic Development
 3 (2010). Available at <
https://www.oecd.org/dev/pgd/46837524.pdf
> (last visited on September 9, 2019); R. Richard Banks, 
Meritocratic Values and Racial Outcomes: Defending Class-Based College Admissions
, 79 N. C. L. Rev. 1062 (2001). Available at <
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=301300&download=yes
> (last visited on September 9, 2019).
[107]
 J. Thomas, Dissenting Opinion in 
Grutter v. Bollinger
, 539 U.S. 306, 361 (2003).
[108]
 Id. at 367-368.
[109]
 Id. at 107.
[110]
 Id.
[111]
 Id.
[112]
 Hannah Arendt, 
The Crisis in Education
 (1954) <
http://www.digitalcounterrevolution.co.uk/2016/hannah-arendt-the-crisis-in-education-full-text/
> (last accessed September 12, 2019).
[113]
 Jo Littler, 
Meritocracy: the great delusion that ingrains inequality
, THE GUARDIAN, March 20, 2017, <
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/mar/20/meritocracy-inequality-theresa-may-Â­donald-trump
> (last accessed on September 9, 2019).
[114]
 Id.
[115]
 STEPHEN MCNAMEE AND ROBERT K. MILLER, JR., THE MERITOCRACY MYTH 49 (2004).
[116]
 Id. at 102.
[117]
 Id.
[118]
 Republic Act No. 7662 (1993).
[119]
 Ponencia, p. 77.
[120]
 Id. at 78.
[121]
 Id. at 81-84.
[122]
 259 Phil. 1016 (1989) [Per J. Cruz, En Banc].
[123]
 CONST., art. XIV, sec. 5(2) provides:
SECTION 5.  . . .
. . . .
(2) Academic freedom shall be enjoyed in all institutions of higher learning.
[124]
 CONST., art. III, sec. 4 provides:
SECTION 4. No law shall be passed abridging the freedom of speech, of expression, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and petition the government for redress of grievances.
[125]
 CONST., art. XIV, sec. 5(3) provides:
SECTION 5.  . . .
. . . .
(3) Every citizen has a right to select a profession or course of study, subject to fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements.
[126]
 CONST., art. VIII, sec. 5(5) provides: 
SECTION 5.  . . .
(5) Promulgate rules concerning the protection and enforcement of constitutional rights, pleading, practice, and procedure in all courts, the admission to the practice of law, the Integrated Bar, and legal assistance to the underprivileged. Such rules shall provide a simplified and inexpensive procedure for the speedy disposition of cases, shall be uniform for all courts of the same grade, and shall not diminish, increase, or modify substantive rights. Rules of procedure of special courts and quasi-judicial bodies shall remain effective unless disapproved by the Supreme Court.
CONCURRING AND DISSENTING OPINION
JARDELEZA, J.:
Petitioners in the present consolidated cases
[1]
 seek the Court's issuance of a writ of prohibition and a writ of preliminary injunction or temporary restraining order to keep the Legal Education Board (herein after referred to as the "LEB Law") from holding the Nationwide Uniform Law School Admission Test (PhilSAT) for, among others, its violation of academic freedom. They also ultimately pray that Republic Act No. 7662,
[2]
 the LEB Law be stricken down as unconstitutional, for its encroachment on the exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in promulgating rules concerning the admission to the practice of law, as provided for in Article VIII, Section 5(5) of the 1987 Constitution.
I concur with the 
ponencia
 insofar as it holds that the Court has no jurisdiction over legal education.
[3]
 Both statutory history and legislative intent contemplate a separation between legal education and the law profession; and the regulation and supervision of legal education, including admissions thereto, fall within the scope of the State's police power. However, and for reasons I shall hereinafter set out, I must dissent from the majority's ruling to partially nullify Legal Education Board Memorandum Order (LEBMO) No. 7-2015 "insofar as it absolutely prescribes the passing of the PhiLSAT x x x as a pre-requisite for admission to any law school which, on its face, run directly counter to institutional academic freedom."
[4]
With respect, I submit that: (I) the invocation of academic freedom as a ground for the partial nullification of the challenged LEBMO is misplaced; (II) the provision by the State of a standardized 
exclusionary
 exam for purposes of admission to a law school is a valid exercise of police power; and (III) the resolution of the challenge against the State regulation's reasonableness involve underlying questions of fact which cannot be resolved by this Court at the first instance.
My above reservation is heightened by my own research which yields a conclusion different from the conclusion of fact reached by the 
ponencia
[5]
 that the National Medical Admission Test (NMAT) upheld in 
Tablarin v. Gutierrez
[6]
 does not have a cut-off or passing score requirement. As I shall also hereinafter show, the NMAT is no different from the PhiLSAT insofar as it also employs an exclusionary (or, in the words of the 
ponencia
, "totalitarian") scheme in terms of student admissions.
[7]
 I see no reason why both tests should merit different treatment.
I
A
My survey of its venerable history and application in Philippine jurisprudence convince me that the concept of academic freedom has different applications, depending on the character of the party invoking it as a right. And, in instances when academic freedom has been invoked as a personal right-that is, one in favor of individuals (whether an educator or a student), the same has been always been inextricably linked (or discussed in relation) to said individual's 
broader
 freedom of expression.
1
The concept of academic freedom began in medieval Europe, where it was used as to protect universities as a community of scholars against ecclesiastical and political intrusion. It was then carried over to Latin America, where it was used to create sanctuaries out of universities for people who were under political persecution.
[8]
 Academic freedom thereafter developed as a legal right consisting of three key concepts: (1) the philosophy of intellectual freedom for teachers and scholars; (2) the idea of autonomy for the university as a community of scholars; and (3) the guarantee of free expression in the Constitution.
[9]
Similarly, the conceptualization of academic freedom in the United States (U.S.) is that it exists to protect scholarship in higher education from untoward political intrusions, mainly through allowing universities to enjoy autonomy over policies of education.
[10]
 Furthermore, while it is conceded to overlap with 
civic free speech
, academic freedom is delineated from the former by limiting it as professional speech within higher education, rather than the rights of expression granted to citizens against broader governmental interference.
[11]
The first mention of academic freedom in a U.S. Supreme Court case came with the promulgation of 
Adler v. Board of Education of the City of New York
.
[12]
 This case involved a New York State statute
[13]
 which required public employees to take loyalty oaths as a condition for their continued employment, and effectively banned state employees from belonging to "subversive groups" under pains of termination. Although the statute was upheld by the Court as a valid exercise of police power,
[14]
 Justice William Douglas,
[15]
 in his key Dissenting Opinion, couched the discourse of academic freedom 
within the context of freedom of thought and expression
. He opined:
x x x The Constitution guarantees freedom of thought and expression to everyone in our society. All are entitled to it, and none needs it more than the teacher.
The public school is, in most respects, the cradle of our democracy. The increasing role of the public school is seized upon by proponents of the type of legislation represented by New York's Feinberg law as proof of the importance and need for keeping the school free of "subversive influences." But that is to misconceive the effect of this type of legislation. Indeed, the impact of this kind of censorship on the public-school system illustrates the high purpose of the First Amendment in freeing speech and thought from censorship.
x x x x
The very threat of such a procedure is certain to raise havoc with academic freedom.
 Youthful indiscretions, mistaken causes, misguided enthusiasms-all long forgotten-become the ghosts of a harrowing present. Any organization committed to a liberal cause, any group organized to revolt against an (sic) hysterical trend, any committee launched to sponsor an unpopular program, becomes suspect. These are the organizations into which Communists often infiltrate. Their presence infects the whole, even though the project was not conceived in sin. 
A teacher caught in that mesh is almost certain to stand condemned. Fearing condemnation, she will tend to shrink from any association that stirs controversy. In that manner, freedom of expression will be stifled.
[16]
 (Emphasis supplied.)
In the same year, the U.S. Supreme Court decided the case of 
Wieman v. Updegraff
,
[17]
 where it struck down as unconstitutional a "loyalty oath" statute
[18]
 required of state employees, including the faculty and staff of Oklahoma Agricultural and Mechanical College, which had the effect of excluding persons from state employment solely on the basis of membership in organizations tagged as "subversive," regardless of their knowledge of the activities and purposes of said organizations.
[19]
Justice Hugo Black, in his Concurring Opinion in 
Wieman
, explained that test oaths were notorious tools of tyranny that inevitably stifle 
freedom of expression
 and freedom of the press, and is counter to the crucial uncompromising interpretation of the Bill of Rights.
[20]
 In support, Justice Felix Frankfurter cautioned that statutes that unwarrantedly inhibit the free spirit of teachers will create a chilling effect on that spirit, which is what teachers "ought to especially cultivate and practice." He added that such "fundamental principles of liberty" inevitably go into the nature of the role that teachers play in any given democratic society, and that 
these freedoms of thought and expression
 importantly bear on the teachers' capacity to encourage open-mindedness and critical inquiry in the people.
[21]
Four years after 
Adler and Wieman
,
[22]
 the U.S. Supreme Court, in the case of 
Sweezy v. New Hampshire
[23]
 gave a landmark pronouncement in its recognition and acceptance of academic freedom and its grounding in the Constitution. This case involved a New Hampshire statute, pursuant to which Paul Sweezy (Sweezy), then a professor at the University of New Hampshire, was interrogated by the New Hampshire Attorney General about his suspected affiliations with communism. Sweezy refused to answer a number of questions about his lectures in class, on the ground that they were unrelated to the purpose of the investigation and that the questions infringed upon an 
area protected by the First Amendment
. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Sweezy's favor and, echoing Justice Frankfurter's concurring opinion in 
Wieman
, held that academic inquiries must be left "as unfettered as possible" where "political power must abstain from intrusion into this activity of freedom."
[24]
Two years after 
Sweezy
, the U.S. Supreme Court, in the case of 
Barenblatt v. United States
,
[25]
 a case involving alleged infringement of First Amendment rights,
[26]
 had occasion to qualify the liberal approach on academic freedom. Speaking through Justice John Marshall Harlan, the Court moderated the safeguarding of academic freedom, and held that it was not immune to warranted interrogation by the legislature, to wit:
x x x Of course, broadly viewed, inquiries cannot be made into the teaching that is pursuedÂ· in any of our , educational institutions. When academic teaching - freedom and its corollary, learning-freedom, so essential to the well-being of the Nation, are claimed, this Court will always be on the alert against intrusion by Congress into this constitutionally protected domain. But this does not mean that the Congress is precluded from interrogating a witness merely because he is a teacher. An educational institution is not a constitutional sanctuary from inquiry into matters that may otherwise be within the constitutional legislative domain merely for the reason that inquiry is made of someone within its walls.
[27]
Finally, in the 1967 case of 
Keyishian v. Board of Regents
,
[28]
 the Supreme Court overturned its decision in 
Adler
, and extended 
First Amendment protection
 to academic freedom. 
Keyishian
 involved faculty members and a non-teaching employee of the State University of New York whose employment contracts were terminated or not renewed when they refused (or failed) to submit a "Feinberg Certificate"
[29]
 required under Section 3021 of the New York Education Law. Under such document, the individual certifies that he is not a Communist and that he has never advocated or been a member of a group which advocated forceful overthrow of the Government.
[30]
 In striking down the statute as unconstitutional, the Supreme Court, citing 
Shelton v. Tucker
,
[31]
 held that though the governmental purpose may have been legitimate and substantial, that purpose could not be undertaken too broadly as to "stifle fundamental personal liberties."
[32]
2
In the Philippines, the term "academic freedom" first appeared in the 1935 Constitution, under Article XIV, Section 5, as a liberty to be enjoyed by state universities:
Sec. 5. All educational institutions shall be under the supervision of and subject to regulation by the State. The Government shall establish and maintain a complete and adequate system of public education, and shall provide at least free public primary instruction, and citizenship training to adult citizens. All schools shall aim to develop moral character, personal discipline, civic conscience, and vocational efficiency, and to teach the duties of citizenship. Optional religious instruction shall be maintained in the public schools as now authorized by law. Universities established by the State shall enjoy 
academic freedom
. The State shall create scholarships in arts, science, and letters for specially gifted citizens. (Emphasis supplied.)
It was restated in the 1973 Constitution in Article XV, Section 8(2) and. was expanded in application to cover both private and public institutions of higher learning, to wit:
Sec. 8. x x x
x x x x
(2) All institutions of higher learning shall enjoy 
academic freedom
. (Emphasis supplied.)
The above provision on academic freedom as a constitutional right was further refined and developed through its amendment in the 1987 Constitution in Article XIV, Section 5(2):
Sec. 5. x x x
x x x x
(2) 
Academic freedom
 shall be enjoyed in all institutions of higher learning. (Emphasis supplied.)
This amendment in the academic freedom clause was explained as a categorical shift from the previous conception that academic freedom was solely institutional in nature, to be enjoyed only by the institutions themselves, to the present belief that said grant is given not only to the institutions themselves, but to the individual stakeholders (teachers, researchers and students) within said institution as well.
[33]
Among others, the critical import of academic freedom has been seen in the dynamics of Philippine national life, where it became a necessary tool used by faculty members and students of an institution to "re-examine existing knowledge and reweigh the prevailing values so dearly cherished by the majority."
[34]
 During the period of Martial Law, for instance, especially during the. rise of student activism during the First Quarter Storm, universities served as refuge for those who were politically targeted by the ruling regime, under the protection of the academic freedom that the universities enjoyed. The nature of academic freedom as a right has been seen as a furtherance of the right to freedom of expression, that is, faculty members and students, as stakeholders of the institutions of higher learning, enjoy the freedom of expression even if they are within the university.
[35]
 The general perception, in fact, appears to be that academic freedom is not only enshrined in the Constitution, but is 
part and parcel of one's freedom of expression
.
[36]
In the case of 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
,
[37]
 the Court, in discussing the concept of academic freedom, held:
2. Nor is this all. There is, as previously noted, the recognition in the Constitution of institutions of higher learning enjoying academic freedom. It is more often identified with the right of a faculty member to pursue his studies in his particular specialty and thereafter 
to make known or publish
 the result of his endeavors without fear that retribution would be visited on him in the event that his conclusions are found distasteful or objectionable to the powers that be, whether in the political, economic, or academic establishments. For the sociologist, Robert McIver it is "
a right
 claimed by the accredited educator, as teacher and as investigator, to interpret his findings and 
to communicate his conclusions
 without being subjected to any interference, molestation, or penalization because these conclusions are unacceptable to some constituted authority within or beyond the institution." As for the educator and philosopher Sidney Hook, this is his version: "What is academic freedom? Briefly put, 
it is the freedom of professionally qualified persons to
 inquire, discover, 
publish and teach the truth as they see it
 in the field of their competence. It is subject to no control or authority except the control or authority of the rational methods by which truths or conclusions are sought and established in these disciplines."
3. That is only one aspect though. Such a view does not comprehend fully the scope of academic freedom recognized by the Constitution. For it is to be noted that the reference is to the "institutions of higher learning" as the recipients of this boon. It would follow then that the school or college itself is possessed of such a right. It decides for itself its aims and objectives and how best to attain them. It is free from outside coercion or interference save possibly when the overriding public welfare calls for some restraint. It has a wide sphere of autonomy certainly extending to the choice of students. This constitutional provision is not to be construed in a niggardly manner or in a gradging fashion. That would be to frustrate its purpose, nullify its intent. Former President Vicente G. Sinco of the University of the Philippines, in his Philippine Political Law, is similarly of the view that it "definitely grants the right of academic freedom to the university as an institution as distinguished from the academic freedom of a university professor." He cited the following from Dr. Marcel Bouchard, Rector of the University of Dijon, France, President of the conference of rectors and vice-chancellors of European universities: "It is a well-established fact, and yet one which sometimes tends to be obscured in discussions of the problems of freedom, that the collective liberty of an organization is by no means the same thing as the freedom of the individual members within it; in fact, the two kinds of freedom are not even necessarily connected. In considering the problems of academic freedom one must distinguish, therefore, between the autonomy of the university, as a corporate body, and the freedom of the individual university teacher." Also: "To clarify further the distinction between the freedom of the university and that of the individual scholar, he says: The personal aspect of freedom consists in the right of each university teacher-recognized and effectively guaranteed by society-
to seek and express the truth as he personally sees it, both in his academic work and in his capacity as a private citizen
. Thus the status of the individual university teacher is at least as important, in considering academic freedom, as the status of the institutions to which they belong and through which they disseminate their learning." x x x
[38]
 (Underscoring supplied.)
Garcia
 and subsequent cases would show the Court's attempts to outline the distinction between academic freedom as a right enjoyed by the educational institution,
[39]
 or its individual stakeholders such as the teacher/researcher/educator
[40]
 or student.
[41]
B
In this case, and save for petitioner-intervenor St. Thomas More School of Law and Business (St. Thomas More), all petitioners appear to be 
individual
 educators and students. There is no assertion (much less proof) from any of them that the challenged LEB Law, in general, and the imposition of the PhiLSAT passing requirement, in particular, infringes on their 
personal
 rights to freedom of expression. This, to my mind, is precisely the reason why the 
ponencia
 itself focused on the concept of academic freedom 
as enjoyed by an educational institution
, specifically, the "freedom of law schools to determine for itself who may be admitted to legal education x x x."
[42]
On this score, I have examined the petition-in-intervention filed by St. Thomas More, which raised the following causes of action and arguments:
(1) The imposition of the PHILSAT passing requirement would inevitably lead to a decrease in law student enrollees which will, in turn, "result to an increase in tuition fees x x x to recover lost revenue x x x" and "in effect puts law schools away from the reach of the poor students in the provinces;"
[43]
(2) The imposition of the PHILSAT passing requirement "arbitrarily encroaches on the academic freedom of the Dean of St. Thomas More to choose its students" on the basis of "values, character, sense of honesty, ethics, and sense of service to others and to society;"
[44]
(3) The imposition of the PHILSAT passing requirement is unfair and unreasonable;
[45]
(4) The LEB Law clearly provides that the intent was to improve legal education, not regulate access thereto;
[46]
(5) The ruling of the Court in 
Tablarin v. Judge Gutierrez
[47]
 sustaining the constitutionality of the National Medical Admissions Test (NMAT) is inapplicable;
[48]
 and
(6) The LEB Law is an undue delegation of legislative power.
[49]
Of the six foregoing issues, only one (issue No.2) 
textually
 references the concept of academic freedom. Indeed, the freedom to determine who may be admitted to study is among the "four essential freedoms" accorded an educational institution. This freedom, however, is by no means absolute; it must be balanced with important state interests "which cannot also be ignored for they serve the interest of the greater majority."
[50]
 It is beyond cavil that the State has an interest in prescribing regulations to promote the education and the general welfare of the people.
[51]
In this case, the 
ponencia
 itself declares that "the PhiLSAT, when administered as an aptitude test, is reasonably related to the State's unimpeachable interest in improving the quality of legal education."
[52]
 I find that, in addition to the avowed policy to improve legal education, the provision of the PhiLSAT Passing Requirement may also serve to discourage the proliferation of the "great evil" sought to be corrected by the "permit system."
[53]
 As the 
ponencia
 cites, Act No. 3162, back in 1924, created the Board of Educational Survey which made "factual findings" that "a great majority of schools from primary grade to the university are money-Â­making devices of persons who organize and administer them."
[54]
 Dean Sedfrey M. Candelaria, in his report to the Legal Education Summit on July 31, 2019, representing the Legal Education Board Charter Cluster, admitted to the continued existence of "non-performing" law schools. Thus, it is my view that the Court should carefully weigh casting in stone a rule leaving to a law school the unbridled discretion to determine for itself the PhilSAT passing score for purposes of admission to legal education. In fact, I would argue that the provision of minimum standards (such as a minimum PhiLSAT passing score) for admission to law schools is, in principle, no different from the provision of standards on matters such as the maximum rates of tuition fee increases
[55]
 the location and construction of school buildings, the adequacy of library, laboratory and classroom facilities, the maximum number of students per teacher, and qualifications of teachers, among others. Such standards, which are also police power measures instituted in furtherance of the public interest, arguably have some effect on an educational institution's "essential freedoms."
II
While the 
ponencia
 would hold that the PhiLSAT, as an aptitude test, passes the test of reasonableness, it declares the challenged LEB Law issuance unreasonable to the extent that it is exclusionary, that is, it provides a cut-off score which effectively forces law schools, under pain of administrative sanctions, to choose students only from a "[s]tate-determined pool of applicants x x x."
[56]
I disagree.
There is nothing constitutionally abhorrent with the provision by the State of a standardized 
exclusionary
 exam. This has long been settled in the case of 
Tablarin v. Gutierrez
.
[57]
 There, the Court upheld the taking and passing of the National Medical Admission Test (NMAT) as a national prerequisite for admission to all medical schools in the Philippines since academic year 1986-1987, pursuant to the Republic Act No. 2382, otherwise known as the "Medical Act of 1959," and under Department of Education, Culture and Sports (DECS) Order No. 52 series of 1985:
x x x MECS Order No. 52, s. 1985, as noted earlier, articulates the rationale of regulation of this type: the improvement of the professional and technical quality of the graduates of medical schools, by upgrading the quality of those admitted to the student body of the medical schools. That upgrading is sought by selectivity in the process of admission, selectivity consisting, among other things, of limiting admission to those who exhibit in the required degree the aptitude for medical studies and eventually for medical practice. The need to maintain, and the difficulties of maintaining, high standards in our professional schools in general, and medical schools in particular, in the current stage of our social and economic development, are widely known.
We believe that the government is entitled to prescribe an admission test like the NMAT as a means for achieving its stated objective of "upgrading the selection of applicants into [our] medical schools" and of "improv[ing] the quality of medical education in the country."
 Given the widespread use today of such admission tests in, for instance, medical schools in the United States of America (the Medical College Admission Test [MCAT] and quite probably in other countries with far more developed educational resources than our own, and taking into account the failure or inability of the petitioners to even attempt to prove otherwise, we are entitled to hold 
that the NMAT is reasonably related to the securing of the ultimate end of legislation and regulation in this area. That end, it is useful to recall, is the protection of the public from the potentially deadly effects of incompetence and ignorance in those who would undertake to treat our bodies and minds for disease or trauma
. (Emphasis supplied.)
Furthermore, contrary to the 
ponencia
's findings, I do not see any difference in how the NMAT and the PhiLSAT are 
meant
 to (or even actually) operate.
[58]
 Both are, in fact, exclusionary exams. Permit me to explain.
Under Department of Education (DepEd) Department Order (DO) No. 52, Series of 1985, the NMAT, as a uniform admission test, was required to be "successfully hurdled by all college graduates seeking admission into medical schools in the Philippines, beginning the school year 1986-1987." Although the same DO provides that the NMAT rating of an applicant will be considered "with other admission requirements" as basis for the issuance of a Certificate of Eligibility, it also provides that no such Certificate will be issued without the required NMAT qualification (that is, meeting the 
cut-off score
-which shall be determined by the Board of Medical Education on a yearly basis). 
That the NMAT, similar to the PhiLSAT, was meant to be exclusionary in nature is clear from DepEd DO No. 11, issued subsequently in 1987, which provides that the cut-off score of 45
th
 percentile shall he followed for the December 6, 1987 and April 24, 1988 NMAT examinations.
In fact, this exclusionary nature appears to subsist to this day. Memorandum Order No. 18, Series of 2016
[59]
 issued by the Commission on Higher Education
[60]
 provides, to wit:
17.3 Minimum Standards for Admission
Applicants seeking admission to the medical education program must have the following qualifications:
Holder of at least a baccalaureate degree;
Must have taken the National Medical Admission Test 
(NMAT) not more than two (2) years from the time of admission, 
with a percentile score equivalent to or higher than that currently prescribed by the school or the [CHED], whichever is higher
;
The applicant shall submit the following documents to the medical schools:
â€¢ x x x
â€¢ x x x
â€¢ 
Certified true copy of NMAT score
17.4 Certificate of Eligibility for Admission to Medical School
On the basis of foregoing documents
, the medical school is responsible for and accountable for the issuance of the Certificate of Eligibility for Admission to medical school.
x x x
Likewise, it is also the responsibility of the medical school to verify the 
authenticity of the NMAT score
 against the master list provided by the recognized testing center.
17.5 NMAT Score cut off
An NMAT score cut-off of at least 40
th
 percentile will be implemented by all higher educational institutions offering medical program.
Medical schools are hereby required to declare their NMAT cut-off score as part of their Annual Report (electronic and hard copy) to be submitted to CHED.
x x x x (Emphasis and underscoring supplied.)
Thus, even under the present rule, students who fail to get an NMAT score of 40
th
 percentile (or the declared cut-off score of their chosen medical school, whichever is higher) will not be issued a Certificate of Eligibility and therefore cannot be admitted to medical school. Clearly, the NMAT is no different from the PhiLSAT insofar as it also employs an exclusionary (or, in the words of the 
ponencia
, "totalitarian") scheme in terms of student admissions.
[61]
 I therefore see no reason why both tests should merit different treatment. The principle behind this Court's ruling in 
Tablarin
 should be applied here.
III
A
The other allegations against the LEB Law, in general, and the PhiLSAT passing requirement, in particular, seem to be challenges against its reasonableness as a police power measure. What is "reasonable," however, is not subject to exact definition or scientific formulation. There is no all-embracing test of reasonableness;
[62]
 its determination rests upon human judgment as 
applied to the facts and circumstances
 of each particular case.
[63]
The consolidated petitions all sought direct recourse with this Court. As We have most recently reaffirmed in 
Gios-Samar, Inc. v. Department of Transportation and Communications
,
[64]
 direct resort to this Court is proper only to seek resolution of questions of law:
x x x Save for the single specific instance provided by the Constitution under Section 18, Article VII of the Constitution, 
cases the resolution of which depends on the determination of questions of fact cannot be brought directly before the Court because we are not a trier of facts. We are not equipped, either by structure or rule, to receive and evaluate evidence in the first instance; these are the primary functions of the lower courts or regulatory agencies.
 This is the 
raison d'etre
 behind the doctrine of hierarchy of courts. It operates as a constitutional filtering mechanism designed to enable this Court to focus on the more fundamental tasks assigned to it by the Constitution. 
It is a bright-line rule which cannot be brushed aside by an invocation of the transcendental importance or constitutional dimension of the issue or cause raised.
[65]
 (Citations omitted, emphasis supplied.)
I submit that the Court should refrain from resolving the challenges against the reasonableness of the LEB Law (and related issuances) at this time. Taking issue at reasonableness, equity or fairness of a state action, in a vacuum and divorced from the factual circumstances that suffer the same, would mean that this Court will have to adjudicate (in my view, wrongly) based on conjectures and unsupported presuppositions. As it appears, this Court will be settling controversies based on unsupported allegations
[66]
 or, worse, grounds not even pleaded or raised by the parties.
[67]
 Allegations and counter-allegations against the constitutionality and/or reasonableness of a challenged state action need to be proven in evidence, otherwise they may be no more than uncorroborated rhetoric.
Given this fact-based nature of the question of reasonableness of an exercise of police power, the present questions pertaining to the propriety or validity of the PhiLSAT should be dismissed at this point and given its turn in a trial, where the equipped lower court may first resolve questions of fact, such as whether the PhiLSAT as administered by the LEB meets the careful design that our legislators intended.
B
Mere invocation of a constitutional right, in this case academic freedom, does not excuse the parties so invoking from actually proving their case through evidence. This is chiefly true in a petition that seeks the invalidation of a law that enjoys the presumption of constitutionality. The burden of proving one's cause through evidence must rise against the bar that gives the challenged law default constitutionality. As We held in the case of 
Ermita-Malate Hotel and Motel Operators Association, Inc. v. City Mayor of Manila
,
[68]
 citing 
O'Gorman & Young v. Hartford Fire Insurance Co.
:
[69]
It admits of no doubt therefore that there being a presumption of validity, 
the necessity for evidence to rebut it is unavoidable
, unless the statute or ordinance is void on its [face,] which is not the case here. The principle has been nowhere better expressed than in the leading case of 
O'Gorman & Young v. Hartford Fire Insurance Co.
, where the American Supreme Court through Justice Brandeis tersely and succinctly summed up the matter thus:
"The statute here questioned deals with a subject clearly within the scope of the police power. We are asked to declare it void on the ground that the [specific] method of regulation prescribed is unreasonable and hence deprives the plaintiff of due process of law. 
As underlying questions of fact may condition the constitutionality of legislation of this character, the presumption of constitutionality must prevail in the absence of some factual foundation of record for overthrowing the statute.
"
No such factual foundation being laid in the present case, the lower court deciding the matter on the pleadings and the stipulation of [facts], the presumption of validity must prevail and the judgment against the ordinance set aside.
[70]
 (Emphasis supplied.)
The tall order, therefore, to overturn the constitutional presumption in favor of a law must be through a conclusive "factual foundation," the absence of which must inevitably result in the upholding of the constitutionality of the challenged law.
Until the decisive factual questions are determined in the context of a trial, this Court should refrain from making an effective pronouncement as to the validity or invalidity of the PhiLSAT. The wide-ranging consequences of the issues raised in these petitions, when decided, all the more call for prudence and constitutionally-intended restraint until all the factual components that bear on these issues are ascertained and definitively settled. The Philippine legal education and the legal profession are worthy of no less.
Finally, to strike down a legislative act on the basis of unalleged or unestablished factual conclusions that essentially came nowhere near their burdens of proof is the height of disservice to the causes these parties before Us sought to protect, whether that be a student's right to education, a law school's institutional academic freedom or the State's duty to supervise and regulate education that is invested with public interest.
This Court will serve no other end but expediency in insisting to deem ripe the unquestionably paramount but undoubtedly premature question of whether an examination that fundamentally seeks to improve the state of the country's legal education is succeeding or failing on its promise.
For all the foregoing reasons, I vote to 
DISMISS
 the petition.
[1]
 
Abayata, et al. v. Hon. Salvador Medialdea, et al.
 (G.R. No. 242954) and 
Pimentel, et al. v. Legal Education Board
 (G.R. No. 230642).
[2]
 Otherwise known as the Legal Education Reform Act of 1993, hereinafter referred to as "LEB Law"
[3]
 
Ponencia
, pp. 37-53.
[4]
 
Id.
 at 88.
[5]
 
Id.
 at 86.
[6]
 G.R. No. 78164, July 31, 1987, 152 SCRA 730.
[7]
 
Ponencia
, p. 87.
[8]
 Pacifico Agabin, 
Academic Freedom and the Larger Community
, Philippine Law Journal, Vol. 52, 336, 336 (1977) Phil. L.J. 336, 336 (1977).
[9]
 Enrique M. Fernando, 
Academic Freedom as a Constitutional Right
, Philippine Law Journal, Vol. 52, 289, 290 (1977); citing Fuchs, 
Academic Freedom - Its basic Philosophy, Function and History
, in BAADE (ed.).
[10]
 J. Peter Byrne, 
Constitutional Academic Freedom After Grutter: Getting Real about the "Four Freedoms" of a University
, Georgetown University Law Center, 77 U. Colo. L. Rev. 929-953 (2006).
[11]
 
Id.
 at 930.
[12]
 342 U.S. 485 (1952).
[13]
 
Id.
 at 498. The Civil Service Law of New York, Section 12(a) thereof made ineligible for employment in any public school any member of any organization advocating the overthrow of the Government by force, violence or any unlawful means.
[14]
 
Id.
 at 493. According to the Court:
A teacher works in a sensitive area in a school room. There he shapes the attitude of young minds towards the society in which they live. In this, the state has a vital concern. It must preserve the integrity of the schools. That the school authorities have the right and the duty to screen the officials, teachers, and employees as to their fitness to maintain the integrity of the schools as a part of ordered society, cannot be doubted. One's associates, past and present, as well as one's conduct, may properly be considered in determining fitness and loyalty. From time immemorial, one's reputation has been determined in part by the company he keeps. In the employment of officials and teachers of the school system, the state may very properly inquire into the company they keep, and we know of no rule, constitutional or otherwise, that prevents the state, when determining the fitness and loyalty of such persons, from considering the organizations and persons with whom they associate.
If, under the procedure set up in the New York law, a person is found to be unfit and is disqualified from employment in the public school system because of membership in a listed organization, he is not thereby denied the right of free speech and assembly. His freedom of choice between membership in the organization and employment in the school system might be limited, but not his freedom of speech or assembly, except in the remote sense that limitation is inherent in every choice. Certainly such limitation is not one the state may not make in the exercise of its police power. to protect the schools from pollution and thereby to defend its own existence.
[15]
 As concurred in by Justice Black.
[16]
 
Supra
 note 12 at 508-509 (1952).
[17]
 344 U.S. 183 (1952).
[18]
 The Oklahoma Stat. Ann, 1950, Tit. 51, Section 37.1-37.9 required each state officer and employee, as a condition of his employment, to take a "loyalty oath" stating, 
inter alia
, that he is not, and has not been for the preceding five years, a member of any organization listed by the Attorney General of the U.S. as "communist front" or "subversive."
[19]
 
Wieman v. Upegraff
, 344 U.S. 485, 193 (1952); The Court, in the main, found a violation of the Due Process Clause ("Indiscriminate classification of innocent with knowing activity must fall as an assertion of arbitrary power.") and held that the Government's efforts at countering threats of subversion must not be at the expense of democratic freedoms.
[20]
 
Id.
 Justice Hugo elucidated thus:
Governments need and have ample power to punish treasonable acts. But it does not follow that they must have a further power to punish thought and speech, as distinguished from acts. Our own free society should never forget that laws which stigmatize and penalize thought and speech of the unorthodox have a way of reaching, ensnaring and silencing many more people than at first intended. We must have 
freedom of speech
 for all or we will, in the long run, have it for none but the cringing and the craven. And I cannot too often repeat my belief that the right to speak on matters of public concern must be wholly free or eventually be wholly lost. (Italics supplied.)
[21]
 
Wieman v. Upegraff, supra
 note 19 at 196; Justice Frankfurter explained:
To regard teachers-in our entire educational system, from the primary grades to the university-as the priests of our democracy is therefore not to indulge in hyperbole. It is the special task of teachers to foster those habits of open-mindedness and critical inquiry which alone make for responsible citizens, who, in turn, make possible an enlightened and effective 
public opinion
. Teachers must fulfill their function by precept and practice, by the very atmosphere which they generate; they must be exemplars of open-mindedness and free inquiry. They cannot carry out their noble task if the conditions for the practice of a responsible and critical mind are denied to them. They must have the 
freedom of responsible inquiry, by thought and action
, into the meaning of social and economic ideas, into the checkered history of social and economic dogma. They must be free to sift evanescent doctrine, qualified by time and circumstance, from that restless, enduring process of extending the bounds of understanding and wisdom, to assure which the 
freedoms of thought, of speech
, of inquiry, of worship are guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States against infraction by national or State government. (Italics supplied.)
[22]
 
Supra
 note 12.
[23]
 354 U.S. 234, 262 (1957).
[24]
 
Id.
 at 262-263, Justice Frankfurter's opinion further added:
x x x This means the exclusion of governmental intervention in the intellectual life of a university. It matters little whether such intervention occurs avowedly or through action that inevitably tends to check the ardor and fearlessness of scholars, qualities at once so fragile and so indispensable for fruitful academic labor. x x x
To further emphasize the nature and design of a university and the import of its academic freedom as rooted in freedom of expression and thought, Justice Frankfurter quoted a statement from a conference of senior scholars from the University of Cape Town and the University of the Witwatersrand, to wit:
"In a university, knowledge is its own end, not merely a means to an end. A university ceases to be true to its own nature if it becomes the tool of Church or State or any sectional interest. A university is characterized by the spirit of free inquiry, its ideal being the ideal of Socrates-'to follow the argument where it leads.' This implies the right to examine, question, modify or reject traditional ideas and beliefs. Dogma and hypothesis are incompatible, and the concept of an immutable doctrine is repugnant to the spirit of a university. The concern of its scholars is not merely to add and revise facts in relation to an accepted framework, but to be ever examining and modifying the framework itself.
Freedom to reason and freedom for disputation on the basis of observation and experiment are the necessary conditions for the advancement of scientific knowledge. A sense of freedom is also necessary for creative work in the arts which, equally with scientific research, is the concern of the university.
It is the business of a university to provide that atmosphere which is most conducive to speculation, experiment and creation. It is an atmosphere in which there prevail 'the four essential freedoms' of a university-to determine for itself on academic grounds who may teach, what may be taught, how it shall be taught, and who may be admitted to study. (Emphasis supplied.)"
[25]
 360 U.S. 109 (1959).
[26]
 Id. at 114-115, 130. Here, petitioner, a former graduate student and teaching fellow at the University of Michigan, refused to answer questions posed to him in an investigation being conducted by a Congressional Subcommittee into alleged Communist infiltration into the field of education. For his refusal, he was fined and sentenced to imprisonment for six months. The Court, after balancing the competing public and private interests involved, found that petitioner's claim that the "investigation was aimed not at the revolutionary aspects, but at the theoretical classroom discussion of communism x x x rests on a too constricted view of the nature of the investigatory process, and is not supported by a fair assessment of the record x x x."
[27]
 
Id.
 at 113.
[28]
 385 U.S. 589 (1967).
[29]
 
Id.
 at 595-596; taken from the Feinberg Law which required the measure.
[30]
 
Id.
[31]
 
Keyishan v. Board of Regents of Univ. of State of NY, id.
 at 602; citing 
Shelton v. Tucker
, 364 U.S. 479; 
United States v. Associated Press
, 52 F. Sup. 362, 372 (1943).
[32]
 
Id.
 Affirming the significance of academic freedom, and it rationalized:
"x x x The greater the importance of safeguarding the community from incitements to the overthrow of our institutions by force and violence, the more imperative is the need to preserve inviolate the constitutional rights of free speech, free press and free assembly in order to maintain the opportunity for free political discussion, to the end that government may be responsive to the will of the people and that changes, if desired, may be obtained by peaceful means. Therein lies the security of the Republic, the very foundation of constitutional government." (
De Jonge v. Oregon
, 299 U.S. 353, 365 [1937])
Our Nation is deeply committed to safeguarding academic freedom, which is of transcendent value to all of us, and not merely to the teachers concerned. That freedom is therefore a special concern of the First Amendment, which does not tolerate laws that cast a pall of orthodoxy over the classroom.
 "The vigilant protection of constitutional freedoms is nowhere more vital than in the community of American schools." The classroom is peculiarly the "marketplace of ideas." The Nation's future depends upon leaders trained through wide exposure to that robust exchange of ideas which discovers truth "out of a multitude of tongues, [rather] than through any kind of authoritative selection." (
Keyishan v. Board of Regents of Univ. of State of NY, supra
 note 28 at 603. Underscoring supplied.)
[33]
 Delegate Adolf Azcuna's explanation, in sponsoring said amendment, as cited in Pacifico Agabin's 
Comparative Developments in the Law of Academic Freedom
, Philippine Law Journal, Vol. 64, 139-140 (1989):
MR. AZCUNA: In the 1973 Constitution, this freedom is given to the institution itself. All institutions of higher learning shall enjoy academic freedom. So, with this proposal, we will provide academic freedom in the institutions-enjoyed by students, by the teachers, by the researchers and we will not freeze the meaning and the limits of this freedom. Since academic freedom is a dynamic concept and we want to expand the frontiers of freedom, especially in education, therefore we will leave it to the courts to develop further the parameters of academic freedom. We just say that it shall be enjoyed in all institutions of higher learning.
[34]
 
Supra
 note 8 at 338.
[35]
 
Id.
 at 339, citing Emerson & Haber, 
Academic Freedom of the Faculty Member as Citizen
, 28 Law and Contemp. Prob. 525 (1968); Dean Pacifico Agabin posited:
Expression if it is to be free, is not limited to the trivial and the inconsequential. It may strike deep at our most cherished beliefs or speak up for the most unorthodox doctrines. Expression cannot be subjected to prior censorship for fear of serious injury or controversy.
x x x x
This does not mean that freedom of expression is confined to the four walls of the classroom. This would be a very parochial view of free speech. The spirit of free inquiry cannot be cut off, like a water tap, once the student steps out of his classes. It is therefore important that the University encourage discussion and debate outside the classroom, for an atmosphere and ferment in the academic community at large may be more meaningful to the student than freedom of discussions within the confines of the class.
[36]
 Agabin's 
Comparative Developments in the Law of Academic Freedom, supra
 note 1; see also Onofre D. Corpuz's 
Academic Freedom and Higher Education: The Philippine Setting
, Vol. 52, 1977, at 273.
[37]
 G.R. No. L-40779, November 28, 1975, 68 SCRA 277. This case involved a mandamus proceeding where the student prayed that the Faculty Admission Committee of the Loyola School of Theology be ordered to allow her to continue pursuing her Master of Arts in Theology. The Court, in the name of academic freedom, would go on to uphold the school's "wide sphere of autonomy certainly extending to the choice of students."
[38]
 
Id.
 at 283-284.
[39]
 The Court in 
Garcia
; iterated the "four essential freedoms" of a university to determine for itself on academic grounds (I) who may teach, (2) what may be taught, (3) how it shall be taught, and (4) who may be admitted to study, and ultimately found that the Faculty Admission Committee had sufficient grounds to deny the student's admission. 
Id.
 at 293.
[40]
 In the case of 
Montemayor v. Araneta University Foundation
, G.R. No. L-44251, May 31, 1977, 77 SCRA 321, 327, the Court, speaking through Chief Justice Fernando, quoted Robert MacIver, and echoed the 
Sweezy
 definition of academic freedom as a right claimed by the accredited educator, as teacher and as investigator, to interpret his findings and to communicate his conclusions without being subjected to any interference, molestation or penalization because these conclusions are unacceptable to some constituted authority within or beyond the institution.
[41]
 The Court's holding in 
Garcia
, was subject of a strong dissent from Justice Felix Makasiar who argued that academic freedom, although at the time textually granted only to the academic institutions, should be deemed to have been granted to the students themselves as well, as the students constitute part of the institution itself, without whom the institution can neither exist nor operate. According to Justice Makasiar:
What is involved here is not merely academic freedom of the higher institutions of learning as guaranteed by Section 8(2) of Article [V] of the 1973 Constitution. The issue here strikes at the broader freedom of expression of the individual - the very core of human liberty.
Even if the term "academic freedom" were to be limited to institutions of higher learning Â­which to the mind of Dr. Vicente Sinco, an eminent authority in Constitutional Law, is the right of the university as an institution, not the academic freedom of the university professor (Sinco, Phil. Political Law, 1962 ed., 489)-the term "institutions of higher learning" contained in the aforecited provision of our New Constitution comprehends not only the faculty and the college administrators but also the members of the student body. While it is true that the university professor may have the initiative and resourcefulness to pursue his own research and formulate his conclusions concerning the problem of his own science or subject, the motivation therefor may be provoked by questions addressed to him by his students. In this respect, the student-specially a graduate student-must not be restrained from raising questions or from challenging the validity of dogmas whether theological or not. The true scholar never avoids, but on the contrary welcomes and encourages, such searching questions even if the same will have the tendency to uncover his own ignorance. It is not the happiness and self-fulfillment of the professor alone that are guaranteed. The happiness and full development of the curious intellect of the student are protected by the narrow guarantee of academic freedom and 
more so by the broader right of free expression, which includes free speech and press, and academic freedom
. (Emphasis and underscoring supplied.) 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology, supra
 note 37 at 295.
[42]
 
Ponencia
, pp. 59-64, 71.
[43]
 
Rollo
, p. 304. G.R. No. 230642 Vol. I.
[44]
 
Id.
 at 304-305.
[45]
 
Id.
 at 305-306.
[46]
 
Id.
 at 307.
[47]
 
Supra
 note 6.
[48]
 
Rollo
, p. 309. G.R. No. 230642 Vol. I.
[49]
 Id. at 310-313.
[50]
 Secretary of Justice v. Lantion, G.R. No. 139465, October 17, 2000, 343 SCRA 377, 390.
[51]
 
Council of Teachers and Staff of Colleges and Universities of the Philippines, et al. v. Secretary of Education
, G.R. No. 216930, October 9, 2018.
[52]
 
Ponencia
 , p. 88.
[53]
 See 
Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities v. Secretary of Education
, 97 Phil. 806, 812-813 (1955), a case involving challenges to Act No. 2706, as amended by Act No. 3075 and Commonwealth Act No. 180 which provides for a "previous permit system" before a school or any other educational institution can operate. There, the Court, quoting a report commissioned by the Philippine Legislature at the time, upheld the challenged Acts as a valid exercise of police power to correct a "great evil," thus:
x x x An unprejudiced consideration of the fact presented under the caption Private Adventure Schools leads but to one conclusion, viz.: the great majority of them from primary grade to university are money-making devices for the profit of those who organize and administer them. The people whose children and youth attend them are not getting what they pay for. It is obvious that the system constitutes a great evil. That it should be permitted to exist with almost no supervision is indefensible. x x x
[54]
 
Ponencia
 , p. 39.
[55]
 For example, Republic Act No. 6139, otherwise known as An Act To Regulate Tuition And Other School Fees Of Private Educational Institution, Providing For The Settlement Of Controversies Thereon And For Other Purposes. See also 
Lina, Jr. v. Carino
. G.R. No. 100127, April 23, 1993, 221 SCRA 515, where this Court sustained the legal authority of respondent DECS Secretary to set maximum permissible rates or levels of tuition and other school fees and to issue guidelines for the imposition and collection thereof.
[56]
 
Ponencia
, p. 85.
[57]
 
Supra
 note 6.
[58]
 
Ponencia
, p. 86.
[59]
 Also known as the Policies, Standards and Guidelines for the Doctor of Medicine (M.D.) Program.
[60]
 Which now regulates the study of medicine, among others, pursuant to Republic Act No. 7722, otherwise known the Higher Education Act of 1994.
[61]
 
Ponencia
, p. 87.
[62]
 
Mirasol v. Department of Public Works and Highways
, G.R. No. 158793, June 8, 2006, 490 SCRA 318, citing 
City of Raleigh v. Norfolk Southern Railway Co.
, 165 S.E.2d 745 (1969).
[63]
 
Mirasol v. Department of Public Works and Highways, supra
, citing 
Board of Zoning Appeals of Decatur v. Decatur, Ind. Co. of Jehovah's Witnesses
, 117 N.E.2d 115 (1954) Cited in Concurring and Dissenting Opinion of J. Jardeleza in 
Zabal v. Duterte
, G.R. No. 238467, February 12, 2019.
[64]
 G.R. No. 217158, March 12, 2019.
[65]
 Id.
[66]
 Including, for example, that of PhiLSAT being pro-elite and anti-poor, or the converse but equally unverified arguments that PhiLSAT is sound and properly designed to measure the necessary aptitude of prospective law students.
[67]
 Including, for example, the power of the LEB to prescribe the qualifications and classifications of faculty members and deans of graduate schools of law.
[68]
 G.R. No. L-24693, July 31, 1967, 20 SCRA 849.
[69]
 282 U.S. 251 (1931).
[70]
 
Ermita-Malate Hotel and Motel Operators Association, Inc. v. City Mayor of Manila, supra
 note 68 at 857.
SEPARATE CONCURRING OPINION
CAGUIOA, J.:
I concur with the 
ponencia
. I write this opinion only to further expand on the points raised therein, with emphasis on the primordial issue of academic freedom.
The Scope of the Court's Review
The 
ponencia
 declares as constitutional the power of the Legal Education Board (LEB) to set the standards of accreditation for law schools, minimum qualifications of law school faculty members, and the minimum requirements for admission to legal education, granted under Sections 7(c) and 7(e) of Republic Act No. (R.A.) 7662.
[1]
In turn, the 
ponencia
 declares as unconstitutional for encroaching upon the Court's rule-making powers the powers of the LEB to establish a law practice internship as a requirement for taking the Bar examinations,
[2]
 and to adopt a system of continuing legal education for lawyers.
[3]
 The 
ponencia
 also declares as unconstitutional for being 
ultra vires
 a number of resolutions, memoranda, and circulars issued by the LEB for violating the law schools' academic freedom.
I agree with the scope and extent of the Court's disposition in the instant case, as indeed, the Court is not limited only to the issue of the requirement of Philippine Law School Admission Test (PhiLSAT). Apart from the reasons already stated in the 
ponencia
, I note that the petitioners, particularly those in G.R. No. 230642, questioned the entire law, not just the provision empowering the LEB to impose standards for admission into law schools. Moreover, the substantive issues in this case had been expanded in the Advisory for the oral arguments, to cover the following:
Whether or not R.A. No. 7662 violates the academic freedom of law schools, specifically:
a. Section 7(c) which empowers the LEB to set the standards of accreditation for law schools taking into account, among others, the size of enrollment, the qualifications of the members of the faculty, the library and other facilities[;]
b. Section 7(e) which empowers the LEB to prescribe minimum standards for law admission;
c. Section 7(e) which empowers the LEB to prescribe minimum qualifications and compensation of faculty members[;]
d. Section 7(f) which empowers the LEB to prescribe the basic curricula for the course of study; and
Whether or not R.A. No. 7662 is a valid police power measure.
[4]
Clearly, the issues now before the Court go beyond the PhiLSAT. As there are other pressing concerns about the operations of the LEB-vis-a-vis academic freedom, the 
ponencia
 was correct in looking into the LEB's issuances and rulings beyond those covering the PhiLSAT. Stated otherwise, the Court is called upon to look at the entirety of R.A. 7662, as well as the issuances of the LEB, and to test their validity on the basis of the primordial issue of whether they violate the academic freedom of law schools: an exercise the Court is actually called upon to do given that there are no factual issues involved.
While it is true that, on the surface, the issue on the validity of the PhiLSAT is the centerpiece of the instant petitions, a deeper understanding of the issues raised herein, as well as the discussions that arose from the oral arguments, readily reveals that at the heart of the instant controversy is the constitutionality of the LEB's powers under R.A. 7662 
and the reasonableness of the exercise of such powers
, as measured through the yardstick of academic freedom.
It must not be lost on the Court that the exercise by the LEB of its powers under the aforesaid law, including its exercise of control over the law schools' operations, the qualifications of the deans and professors, and especially the curriculum, are even more intrusive and invasive than the PhiLSAT, which only deals with admission to law school. Therefore, it would be a wasted opportunity for the Court to adopt a short-sighted approach and shirk away from delving into the constitutionality of the other powers and acts of the LEB, especially considering that, as extensively shown herein, the LEB's exercise of these powers is punctuated by blatant violations of academic freedom. The Court's ruling in 
Pimentel Jr. v. Hon. Aguirre
[5]
 teaches:
x x x By the 
mere enactment
 of the questioned law or the 
approval of the challenged action
, the dispute is said to have ripened into a judicial controversy even without any other overt act. Indeed, even a singular violation of the Constitution and/or the law is enough to awaken judicial duty. x x x
x x x x
By the same token, when an act of the President, who in our constitutional scheme is a coequal of Congress, is seriously alleged to have infringed the Constitution and the laws, as in the present case, settling the dispute becomes the duty and the responsibility of the courts.
[6]
 (Emphasis and underscoring supplied)
I submit that the Court not only has the opportunity but, in fact, the duty to settle the disputes given the serious allegations of infringement of the Constitution. The Court should thus not foster lingering or recurring litigation as this case already presents the opportune time to rule on the constitutionality of the LEB's statutory powers and how the LEB exercises the same. Hence, I maintain that the Court's disposition of the instant case should not be unduly restricted to only the question of the PhiLSAT's constitutionality.
For ease of reference, quoted below are the functions and powers of the LEB under R.A. 7662:
SEC. 7. 
Powers and Functions
. - For the purpose of achieving the objectives of this Act, the Board shall have the following powers and functions:
a) to administer the legal education system in the country in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Act[;]
b) to supervise the law schools in the country, consistent with its powers and functions as herein enumerated;
c) to set the standards of accreditation for law schools taking into account, among others, the size of enrollment, the qualifications of the members of the faculty, the library and other facilities, without encroaching upon the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning;
d) to accredit law schools that meet the standards of accreditation;
e) to prescribe minimum standards for law admission and minimum qualifications and compensation of faculty members;
f) to prescribe the basic curricula for the course of study aligned to the requirements for admission to the Bar, law practice and social consciousness, and such other courses of study as may be prescribed by the law schools and colleges under the different levels of accreditation status;
g) to establish a law practice internship as a requirement for taking the Bar which a law student shall undergo with any duly accredited private or public law office or firm or legal assistance group anytime during the law course for a specific period that the Board may decide, but not to exceed a total of twelve (12) months. For this purpose, the Board shall prescribe the necessary guidelines for such accreditation and the specifications of such internship which shall include the actual work of a new member of the Bar;
h) to adopt a system of continuing legal education. For this purpose, the Board may provide for the mandatory attendance of practising lawyers in such courses and for such duration as the Board may deem necessary; and
i) to perform such other functions and prescribe such rules and regulations necessary for the attainment of the policies and objectives of this Act.
Much like the 
ponencia
, I have undertaken the same exercise of evaluating, through the lens of academic freedom, the powers of the LEB and 
how the same are and have been exercised
. As a result, I have identified several other LEB issuances beyond those identified by the 
ponencia
 which are arbitrary and unreasonable, and thus null and void.
A. Issues on Academic Freedom
The guarantee of academic freedom is enshrined in Section 5(2), Article XIV of the Constitution, which states that: "[a]cademic freedom shall be enjoyed in all institutions of higher learning." This institutional academic freedom includes "the right of the school or college to decide for itself, its aims and objectives, and how best to attain them free from outside coercion or interference save possibly when the overriding public welfare calls for some restraint."
[7]
 The essential freedoms subsumed in the term "academic freedom" are: 1) who may teach; 2) what may be taught; 3) how it shall be taught; and 4) who may be admitted to study.
[8]
Nevertheless, the Constitution also recognizes the State's power to regulate educational institutions. Section 4(1), Article XIV of the Constitution provides that: "[t]he State recognizes the complementary roles of public and private institutions in the educational system and shall exercise reasonable supervision and regulation of all educational institutions." As gleaned from the quoted provision, the State's power to regulate is subject to the requirement of 
reasonableness
.
The limitation on the State's power to regulate was introduced in the 1987 Constitution. Under the 1973 Constitution, it only states that "[a]ll educational institutions shall be under the supervision of, and subject to regulation by, the State."
[9]
 The framers of the current Constitution saw the need to add the word "reasonable" before the phrase "supervision and regulation" in order to qualify the State's power over educational institutions. This is extant from the deliberations of the Constitutional Commission on August 29, 1986:
MR. GUINGONA. x x x
x x x x
When we speak of 
State supervision and regulation, we refer to the 
external governance of educational institutions
, particularly private educational institutions as distinguished from the internal governance by their respective boards of directors or trustees and their administrative officials
. Even without a provision on external governance, the State would still have the inherent right to regulate educational institutions through the exercise of its police power. 
We have thought it advisable to restate the supervisory and regulatory functions of the State provided in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions with the addition of the word "reasonable." We found it necessary to add the word "reasonable"
 because of an 
obiter dictum
 of our Supreme Court in a decision in the case of 
Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities vs. The Secretary of Education and the Board of Textbooks
 in 1955. In that case, the court said, and I quote:
It is enough to point out that local educators and writers think the Constitution provides for control of education by the State.
The Solicitor General cites many authorities to show that the power to regulate means power to control, and quotes from the proceedings of the Constitutional Convention to prove that State control of private education was intended by organic law.
The addition, therefore, of the word "reasonable" is meant to underscore the sense of the committee, that when the Constitution speaks of State supervision and regulation, 
it does not in any way mean control
. We refer only to the power of the State to provide regulations and to see to it that these regulations are duly followed and implemented. 
It does not include the right to manage, dictate, overrule and prohibit.
 Therefore, it 
does not include the right to dominate
.
x x x x
Delegate Clemente, chairman of the 1973 Constitutional Convention's Committee on Education, has this to say about supervision and regulation, and I quote:
While we are agreed that we need some kind of supervision and regulation by the State, there seems to be a prevailing notion among some sectors in education that 
there is too much interference of the State in the management of private education. If that is true, we need some kind of re-examination of this function of the State to supervise and regulate education because we are all agreed that there must be some kind of diversity, as well as flexibility, in the management of private education
. (Minutes of the November 27, 1971 meeting of the Committee on Education of the 1971 Constitutional Convention, pages 10 and 11.)
[10]
 (Emphasis and underscoring supplied)
Further, the Constitutional Commission deliberations on September 9, 1986 also discuss:
MR. MAAMBONG. What I am trying to say is that we have bogged down in this discussion because we do not see how we can reconcile a concept of state regulation and supervision with the concept of academic freedom.
MR. GASCON. 
When we speak of state regulation and supervision, that 
does not mean dictation
, because we have already defined what education is. Hence, in the pursuit of knowledge in schools we should provide the educational institution as much academic freedom as it needs. 
When we speak of regulation, we speak of guidelines and others. 
We do not believe that the State has any right to impose its ideas on the educational institution because that would already be a violation of their constitutional rights.
There is no conflict between our perspectives.
 When we speak of regulations, we speak of providing guidelines and cooperation in as far as defining curricula, et cetera, 
but that does not give any mandate to the State to impose its ideas on the educational institution
.
 That is what academic freedom is all about.
[11]
 (Emphasis and underscoring supplied)
In sum, 
"reasonable supervision and regulation" by the State over educational institutions does not include the power to control, manage, dictate, overrule, prohibit, and dominate
.
As applied to the instant case, in order to determine whether the LEB's functions violate the academic freedom of law schools, it must be ascertained whether the LEB's discharge of its functions is reasonable.
However, a review of the issuances of the LEB (
i.e.
, memorandum orders, memorandum circulars and resolutions), 
of which this Court can take judicial notice
,
[12]
 and in which there are no factual questions, reveals that the LEB has gone beyond its powers of reasonable supervision and regulation of the law schools. Dean Sedfrey M. Candelaria (Dean Candelaria), as 
amicus curiae
 for this case, expressed a similar view in his 
Amicus Brief
 "[i]t is my considered view that a number of LEB issuances may have overstepped the limits of its jurisdiction, powers and functions. The problem areas have been on the power to prescribe minimum standards for (a) law admission; (b) qualification and compensation of faculty members; and, (c) basic curriculum."
[13]
I accordingly discuss these LEB issuances in relation to the essential freedoms inherent in academic freedom:
i. Who may teach
As already explained, the Constitution protects the right of institutions of higher learning to academic freedom,
[14]
 the first aspect of which is the right to determine "who may teach"
[15]
 and to fix "the appointment and tenure of office of academic staff."
[16]
 This aspect protects an institution's right to select and to assemble a roster of faculty members that best suits its academic aims, objectives and standards, subject only to minimal state interference when some overwhelming public interest calls for the exercise of reasonable supervision and never repressive or dictatorial control.
[17]
 The power to select educators is not some esoteric concept, but involves an institution's freedom to: determine the eligibility of faculty members and other academic staff; categorize their positions and ranks; evaluate their performance; establish quality and retention standards; determine work load and work hours; determine, subject to applicable labor laws, the appropriate compensation and benefits to be given; and choose the facilities that will be made available for their use.
R.A. 7662 purportedly empowers the LEB to prescribe 
minimum
 qualifications and compensation of faculty members, to wit:
SEC. 7. 
Powers and Functions
. - For the purpose of achieving the objectives of this Act, the Board shall have the following powers and functions:
x x x x
c) to set the standards of accreditation for law schools taking into account, among others, the size of enrollment, 
the qualifications of the members of the faculty
, the library and other facilities, without encroaching upon the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning;
x x x x
e) to 
prescribe minimum standards
 for law admission and 
minimum qualifications and compensation of faculty members
[.] (Underscoring supplied)
In the exercise of this power, however, the LEB has grossly violated the academic freedom of law schools 
by going beyond reasonable supervision and regulation in their issuances
. To illustrate:
First
. In the guise of accreditation, the LEB has gravely abused its minimal supervisorial authority by requiring as part of an institution's application for a permit
[18]
 to operate: a) "a copy of the roster of its administrative officials, including the members of the Board of Trustees or Directors,"
[19]
 b) "a roster of its faculty members for the proposed law school, x x x [including] the 
academic credentials and personal data sheets of the dean and of the faculty members
,"
[20]
 c) "the present library holdings for law as well as the name and 
qualifications of the law librarian
"
[21]
 and, quite ridiculously, d) "
pictures of [, among others, the] dean's office, and faculty lounge of the law school
."
[22]
 Under LEB Memorandum Order No. 1, Series of 2011 (LEBMO No. 1-2011), the application for a permit to operate may be denied upon evaluation and ocular inspection,
[23]
 if the LEB finds that the law program is "substandard in the quality of its operation[,] x x x when surrounding circumstances make it very difficult for it to form a 
suitable
 faculty or for any valid and weighty reasons, the proposed law school could not possibly deliver quality legal education."
[24]
The foregoing grounds for denial of an application to operate under LEBMO No. 1-2011 are not only vague and arbitrary but worse, blatantly violative of an institution's academic freedom. By insisting that it can review 1) the "suitability" of the faculty and personnel through the submission of their academic credentials and personal data sheets, and 2) the "quality" of a school's operations through an evaluation of an institution's library holdings and faculty facilities, 
the LEB has unreasonably interfered with an institution's right to select its faculty and staff and to determine the facilities and benefits that will be made available for their use
.
Second
. Again in the guise of accreditation, the LEB overreached its mandate anew by authorizing itself to interview
[25]
 the dean and faculty members of schools applying for recognition status
[26]
 in order for it to determine whether "its students are prepared for the last year of the law curriculum, and that the professors who are to teach review subjects are prepared for the last year of the law course."
[27]
 This requirement is so unreasonable that if an institution undergoing accreditation is found deficient, recognition may be denied and the law school may be closed.
[28]
LEB Memorandum Order No.2, Series of 2013 (LEBMO No. 2-2013) likewise provides that law schools that have a "
weak faculty
,"
[29]
 "inadequate library research facilities,"
[30]
 "no faculty syllabus,"
[31]
 "no moot court room,"
[32]
 and "no faculty lounge,"
[33]
 as determined by the LEB, shall be considered "substandard,"
[34]
 and shall be "unfit to continue operating a law program."
[35]
The LEB's supposed authority to review 1) an individual faculty member's ability to teach and 2) the strength or weakness of the faculty as a whole, is not only presumptuous but is a gross violation of an institution's right to set academic standards and procedures for evaluating the qualifications and performance of its own educators.
Third. In gross violation of an institution's right to select "who may teach," the LEB has also imposed the requirement that the members of the faculty, in addition to their respective law degrees and Bar memberships, must likewise possess Masters of Law degrees (LLM). LEBMO No. 1-2011 pertinently provides:
Section 50.
 The members of the 
faculty of a law school should, at the very least, possess a Ll.B. or a J.D. degree
 and should 
be members of the Philippine Bar
. In the exercise of academic freedom, the law school may also ask 
specialists in various fields of law with other qualifications, provided that they possess relevant doctoral degrees
, to teach specific subjects.
Within a period of five (5) years of the promulgation of the present order, members of the faculty of schools of law shall commence their studies in graduate schools of law.
Where a law school offers the J.D. curriculum, a qualified Ll.B. graduate who is a member of the Philippine Bar may be admitted to teach in the J.D. course and may wish to consider the privilege granted under Section 56 hereof. (Underscoring supplied)
LEB Resolution No. 2014-02 and LEB Memorandum Order No. 17, Series of 2018 (LEBMO No. 17-2018), which implement the foregoing provision, mandate that law schools comply with the following percentages and schedules, 
under pain of downgrading, phase-out, and eventual closure
. LEB Resolution No. 2014-02 provides:
2. The law faculty of all law schools shall have the following percentage of holders of the master oflaws degree:
2.1. School Year - 2017-2018 - 20%
2.2. School Year - 2018-2019 - 40%
2.3. School Year - 2019-2020 - 60%
2.4. School Year - 2020-2021 - 80%
In computing the percentage, 
those who are exempted from the rule shall be included
.
Exempted from this requirement of a master's degree in law are the following:
The Incumbent or Retired Members of the:
3.1
 
Supreme Court;
3.2 
Court of Appeals, Sandiganbayan and Court of Tax Appeals;
3.3 
Secretary of Justice and Under-Secretaries of Justice, Ombudsman, Deputy Ombudsmen, Solicitor General and Assistant Solicitors General;
3.4
 Commissioners of the National Labor Relations Commission who teach Labor Laws;
3.5 
Regional Trial Court Judges;
3.6 
DOJ State and Regional State Prosecutors and Senior Ombudsman Prosecutors who teach Criminal Law and/or Criminal Procedure;
3.7 
Members of Congress who are lawyers who teach Political Law, Administrative Law, Election Law, Law on Public Officers and other related subjects;
3.8
 
Members of Constitutional Commissions who are Lawyers;
3.9 
Heads of bureaus who are lawyers who teach the law subjects which their respective bureaus are implementing;
3.10
 
Ambassadors, Ministers and other diplomatic Officers who are lawyers who teach International Law or related subjects;
3.11 
Those who have been teaching their subjects for 10 years or more upon recommendation of their deans;
 and
3.12 
Other lawyers who are considered by the Board to be experts in any field of law provided they teach the subjects of their expertise.
 (Underscoring supplied)
To ensure compliance with the foregoing, LEBMO No. 17-2018 imposes strict reportorial requirements, including the regular submission of various certifications and even the faculty members' LLM diplomas.
[36]
The foregoing requirements impose unreasonable burdens on incumbent and potential faculty members and unduly infringe on an institution's right to select the legal experts and practitioners that will educate its students and further its academic aspirations. More importantly, the requirement is arbitrary and miserably fails to take into account the distinct nature of the legal profession, 
i.e.
, that legal expertise is not necessarily developed or acquired only through further studies but also (
or more so
) through constant and continuous law practice in various specialized fields.
Under the foregoing rule, a seasoned law practitioner with 10 or 20 years of experience from an established law firm will not be qualified to teach in a law school without an LLM, unless he or she is able to prove to the LEB (not to the institution) that he or she is an expert in the subject he or she seeks to teach. This does not only prejudice the institution, but more so the law student who is, by LEB fiat, senselessly deprived of the opportunity to learn from the wisdom of experience. The significance of actual law practice vis-a-vis law study is highlighted by the fact that a minimum number of years in the former is required as a qualification for appointment as a judge.
[37]
 In contrast, an LLM degree is not even required for members of the Court.
The LEB also failed to consider that 1) LLM programs impose onerous financial/time constraints and opportunity costs on incumbent or potential faculty members, 2) few schools in the Philippines offer LLM programs, and 3) LLM programs abroad teaching foreign laws do not necessarily augment legal expertise, knowledge, and experience in Philippine law. As Dean Candelaria accurately noted in his 
Amicus Brief
, "[t]he mandatory requirement of graduate degrees in law for deans and faculty members under LEB policies, while laudable and ideal, may not be easily realizable in light of the practical difficulties in accessing and maintaining enrollment in graduate programs."
[38]
 Upon being asked during the oral arguments to expound on this matter, Dean Candelaria elucidated as follows:
ASSOCIATE JUSTICE CAGUIOA:
Okay, on page seven (7) of your Brief, you mentioned that the master's requirement while laudable, may not be easily realizable in light of the practical difficulties in accessing and maintaining enrollment in graduate programs. Can you inform the Court exactly what [these] practical difficulties are?
DEAN CANDELARIA:
Your Honor, I teach at least in two (2) schools where there is graduate degree being offered, the Ateneo and San Beda Graduate School of Law with the consortium with the academy, and I have seen the difficulties in particular, for instance, for sitting deans or faculty members, to appropriate the time to actually access the centers for learning, because we don't have as much presence, perhaps, in the Visayas or Mindan[a]o. And of course, we have to ad[a]pt now, because some schools now are going out there, like Ateneo De Naga, has actually requested on-site the offerings. So, difficulties really abound insofar as remote areas are concerned. Manila is not so much problematic, for those who teach in Manila. But for those who would have to fly, from Samar, I know I have a student from Samar, from Mindanao, who would tranche a weekend curriculum, let's say at San Beda . . .
ASSOCIATE JUSTICE CAGUIOA:
So, in other words, Dean, what you are saying is that, as an example, the physical location or the topography of the area is such that, insisting on this requirement would be a grave prejudice to these other law schools because they cannot, in fact, access further higher learning to comply with the requirements of [the] LEB.
DEAN CANDELARIA:
At this stage, Your Honor, as the lack of institutions is really evident, I think we may have to work on this progressively in the near future. With the cooperation of the Bench, the Bar, the Association of Law Schools, and also the Philippine Association of Law Professors, to be able to achieve that goal.
[39]
Undoubtedly, the LEB overreaches its authority in requiring an LLM as a "minimum qualification." 
In imposing the foregoing requirement, the LEB arbitrarily usurped an institution's academic authority to gauge and to evaluate the qualifications of its educators on an individual basis, and hastily reduced the pool of expertise available for selection - to the detriment of the institution, the faculty, the students, and the profession as a whole.
Fourth
. The same observations may be made about the qualifications imposed on deans of law schools and graduate law schools, who are required to possess a Master's or Doctorate Degree, respectively. LEBMO No. 1-2011 states:
Section 51.
 The dean should have, aside from complying with the requirements above, 
at least a Master of Laws (Ll.M.) degree or a master's degree in a related field, and should have been a Member of the Bar for at least 5 years prior to his appointment as dean
.
Section 52.
 The dean of a graduate school of law should possess at least 
a doctorate degree in law
 and should be an 
acknowledged authority in law, as evidenced by publications and membership in learned societies and organizations; members of the faculty of a graduate school of law should possess at least a Master of Laws (Ll.M.) degree or the relevant master's or doctor's degrees in related fields
.
Aside from the foregoing, 
retired justices of the Supreme Court
, the Court of Appeals, the Sandiganbayan and the Court of Tax Appeals may serve as deans of schools of law, provided that they 
have had teaching experience as professors of law and provided further that, with the approval of the Legal Education Board, a graduate school of law may accredit their experience in the collegiate appellate courts and the judgments they have penned towards the degree ad eundem of Master of Laws
. (Underscoring supplied)
The unreasonableness of the foregoing provisions is exemplified by the fact that deans are primarily "school administrators." While certainly, many legal luminaries have occupied, and currently occupy, the position of dean, there is no justifiable reason to absolutely require (rather than encourage or recommend) an LLM (for law deans) and Doctorate Degree (for graduate law deans), when the same would not necessarily improve the management or administration of a law institution. 
On the other hand, if legal scholarship and authority were to be made the standard, it is peculiar that even a retired Member of the Court would prove unfit, unless otherwise approved by the members of the LEB.
Notably, the members of the LEB - while seeing it fit to impose arbitrary requirements to gauge the suitability of faculty members, and to evaluate the strength or weakness of the faculty as a whole - are themselves not subjected to the same educational qualifications. As pointed out by Justice Marvic M.V.F. Leonen during the oral arguments:
JUSTICE LEONEN:
Excuse me, for a moment, you are requiring from all Deans, which you supervise, [and] law professors that they have an advanced degree, yet the LEB does not have an advanced degree, how do you explain this?
[MR.] AQUENDE:
Your Honor, the justification or the rationale that was prepared by the previous Board because it was not approved during our term, the previous Board looked into the function of the LEB and which is not academic in nature, Your Honor.
x x x x
JUSTICE LEONEN:
And in LEB, maybe, even perhaps, you should take care first that the LEB members are all, at minimum, have masteral degrees from reputable law schools here or abroad or a doctoral degree for that matter before you apply it to your constituents, but my point is, isn't that unreasonable x x x
x x x x
x x x that you require deans to take an advance[d] degree x x x
x x x x
In other words, you imposed an educational requirement on law schools and certainly according to our jurisprudence, who to teach is an academic matter? It is a mission of a school and it is protected by academic freedom on the basis of your LLB or JD degrees?
[MR.] AQUENDE:
Yes, Your Honor. The point, Your Honor, is that the fact that the members of the LEB [do] not have x x x higher degrees [is] because the law does not require it. However, that does not mean that we could not x x x
x x x x
JUSTICE LEONEN:
If the law does not require it, it doesn't mean that anything you do will be reasonable. You have to actually prove to us because, again, from my point of view, the degree of judicial scrutiny of any interference On academic freedom x x x the degree of Scrutiny should be very tight. So again, my point is, perhaps you can address the reasonability of the requirement, etcetera x x x
[40]
Fifth
. Finally, the LEB impairs institutional academic freedom by categorizing faculty members and interfering with faculty load, as follows:
Section 33. Full-time and Part-time Faculty.
 There are two general kinds of faculty members, the full-time and part-time faculty members.
a)
 
A full-time faculty member is one:
1)
 Who possesses the 
minimum qualification of a member
 of the faculty as prescribed in Sections 50 and 51 of LEBMO NO. 1;
2) 
Who 
devotes not less than eight (8) hours of work for the law school
;
3)
 Who has 
no other occupation elsewhere
 requiring regular hours of work, except when permitted by the higher education institution of which the law school is a part; and
4) 
Who is 
not teaching full-time in any other higher education institution
.
b)
 A part-time faculty member is one who does not meet the qualifications of a full-time professor as enumerated in the preceding number.
Section 34. Faculty Classification and Ranking.
 Members of the faculty may be classified, in the discretion of the higher education institution of which the law school is a part, according to academic proceeding, training and scholarship into Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, and Instructor.
Part-time members of the faculty may be classified as Lecturers, Assistant Professorial Lecturers, Associate Professorial Lecturers and Professorial Lecturers. 
The law schools shall devise their scheme of classification and promotion not inconsistent with these rules.
Section 35. Faculty Load.
 Generally, 
no member of the faculty should teach more than 3 consecutive hours in any subject
 nor should he or she be loaded with subjects requiring 
more than three preparations or three different subjects (no matter the number of units per subject) in a day
.
However, 
under exceptionally meritorious circumstances, the law deans may allow members of the faculty to teach 4 hours a day provided that there is a break of 30 minutes between the first 2 and the last 2 hours
.
[41]
 (Underscoringsupplied)
The foregoing provisions unequivocally show that the LEB has not only overreached its authority to set minimum qualifications for faculty members, 
it has arbitrarily dabbled in the internal affairs of law schools
, including the grant of faculty positions and titles, the regulation of work hours and occupations, and the assignment of work load
. While presumably imposed for the benefit of the students and the professor, the imposition of the foregoing is better left to the individual institution which would be in a better position to determine the needs and capacities of its students and its faculty.
To reiterate, academic institutions are free to select their faculty, to fix their qualifications, to evaluate their performance, and to determine their ranks, positions, and teaching loads. The LEB's purported power to prescribe 
minimum
 qualifications and compensation of faculty members should be construed to cover only minimal state interference when some important public interest calls for the exercise of reasonable supervision. 
It does 
not
 include a blanket authority 
to impose trivial rules as it sees fit
. In the exercise of the LEB's purported power to supervise law schools, it has engaged in the unreasonable and invalid regulation, control, and micromanagement of law schools. 
The LEB has become, for lack of a better word, a tyrant.
ii. What may be taught
The second aspect of academic freedom involves the right of institutions of higher learning to determine "what may be taught,"
[42]
 
i.e.
, to design the curricula (what courses to offer, when to offer them, and in what sequence) and to craft the appropriate syllabi (course description, coverage, content, and requirements).
The importance of this right cannot be overemphasized. An academic institution should be given the necessary independence to identify, design and establish the courses and subjects that it deems crucial to a student's personal and professional development and what it believes will best reflect and inculcate its fundamental academic values. Protecting an institution's right to select various fields of study and to design the corresponding curricula and syllabi fosters critical thinking, diversity, innovation, and growth, encourages the free exchange of ideas, 
and protects the youth from potential indoctrination by the State
.
Similar to the right of an academic institution to determine who may teach therefore, the Constitution likewise safeguards its right to determine what to teach and how to teach, free from undue interference "except when there is an overriding public welfare which would call for some restraint."
[43]
While R.A. 7662 empowers the LEB to prescribe "the 
basic
 curricula for the course of study aligned to the requirements for admission to the Bar, law practice and social consciousness,"
[44]
 
it does 
not
 grant the LEB unbridled authority to impose unreasonable requirements in contravention of an academic institution's fundamental right to determine what to teach and how to go about it
.
A review of LEB's various memoranda evinces no other conclusion than that it has grossly overstepped this authority, as shown below:
LEBMO No. 1-2011 requires institutions 1) to submit its curriculum for evaluation and approval as a requirement for accreditation,
[45]
 2) to comply with the minimum unit requirements for each legal education, course, 
i.e.
, Bachelor of Laws (LLB) (152 units), Juris Doctor (JD) (168 units), LLM (36 units) and Doctor of Juridical Science (SJD) or Doctor of Civil Law (DCL) (60 units),
[46]
 3) to follow a specific and highly inflexible model curricula,
[47]
 and 4) to comply with the course names, prescribed number of units, number of hours, course descriptions, and prerequisites.
[48]
In LEBMO No. 2-2013, the LEB unequivocally stated that "in the exercise of its regulatory authority, [it may] void the graduation of any law student and/or impose appropriate sanctions on any law school that has not complied with the curricular requirements, as well as policy and standards required by the Board."
[49]
A perusal of the mandatory model curricula unmistakably shows that the LEB has gone far beyond the mere prescription of a "basic curricula." For instance, all the following subjects as specifically described in the course descriptions, in the corresponding number of units, during the semester indicated. This is illustrated by the mandatory first year courses of a JD degree, as follows:
First Year
[50]
1
st SEMESTER
2nd SEMESTER
COURSE
UNIT
COURSE
UNIT
Introduction to Law
1
Obligations and Contracts
5
Persons and Family Relations
4
Constitutional Law II
3
Constitutional Law I
3
Criminal Law II
4
Criminal Law I
3
Legal Technique and Logic
2
Statutory Construction
2
Legal Writing
2
Philosophy of Law
2
Basic Legal Ethics
3
Legal Research and Thesis Writing
2
Legal Profession
1
TOTAL
18
TOTAL
19
In relation thereto, Section 58.2 of the same issuance particularly describes each course, the required units and hours per week, 
and even the manner by which each class should be conducted
. Sample course descriptions of the first year courses of JD degree are shown below:
COURSE NAME/NUMBER OF UNITS/CONTACT HOURS/ PREREQUISITES
COURSE DESCRIPTION
First Year - First Semester
INTRODUCTION TO LAW
Cases, recitations and lectures;
1 hour a week;
1 unit
A general course given to freshmen, providing for an overview of the various aspects of the concept of law, with emphasis on the relationship between law, jurisprudence, equity, courts, society and public policy, presented through selected provisions of law, cases and other materials depicting settled principles and current developments, both local and international, including a review of the evolution of the Philippine legal system.
PERSONS AND FAMILY RELATIONS
Cases, recitations and lectures;
4 hours a week;
4 units
A basic course on the law of persons and the family which first views the effect and application of laws, to examine the legal norms affecting civil personality, marriage, property relations between husband and wife, legal separation, the matrimonial regimes of absolute community, conjugal partnership of gains, and complete separation of property; paternity and filiation, ad[o]ption, guardianship, support, parental authority, surnames, absence and emancipation, including the rules of procedure relative to the foregoing.
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW I
Cases, recitations and lectures;
3 hours a week;
3 units
A survey and evaluation of basic principles dealing with the structure of the Philippine Government.
CRIMINAL LAW I
Cases, recitations and lectures;
3 hours a week;
3 units
A detailed examination into the characteristics of criminal law, the nature of felonies, stages of execution, circumstances affecting criminal liability, persons criminally liable[,] the extent and extinction of criminal liability as well as the understanding of penalties in criminal law, their nature and theories, classes, crimes, habitual delinquency, juvenile delinquency, the Indeterminate Sentence Law and the Probation Law. The course covers Articles 1-113 of the Revised Penal Code and related laws.
STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION
Cases, recitations and lectures;
2 hours a week;
2 units
A course that explores the use and force of statutes and the principles and methods of their construction and interpretation.
PHILOSOPY OF LAW
2 hours a week;
2 units
A study of the historical roots of law from Roman times, the schools of legal thought that spurred its growth and development, and the primordial purpose of law and legal education.
LEGAL RESEARCH AND THESIS WRITING
Lectures, reading and practical work;
2 hours a week;
2 units
 
The course will introduce structures to the methodology of legal research and the preparation of legal opinions, memoranda, or expository or critical paper on any subject approved by the faculty member teaching it.
LEGAL PROFESSION
Cases, recitations and lectures
1 hour a week;
1 unit
The history and development of the legal profession in the Philippines, its current problems, goals, and role in society. Also covered are the methodologies in the preparation of J.D. thesis
First Year - Second Semester
OBLIGATIONS AND CONTRACTS
Cases, recitations and lectures;
5 hours a week;
5 units
An in-depth study of the nature, kinds and effect of obligations and their extinguishment[,] contracts in general, their requisites, form and interpretation[,] defective contracts, quasi contracts, natural obligations, and estoppel.
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW II
Cases, recitations and lectures;
3 hours a week;
3 units
A comprehensive study of the Constitution, the bill of rights and judicial review of the acts affecting them.
CRIMINAL LAW II
Cases, recitations and lectures;
4 hours a week;
4 units
A comprehensive appraisal of specific felonies penalized in Book II of the Revised Penal Code, as amended, their nature, elements and corresponding penalties.
LEGAL TECHNIQUE AND LOGIC
Recitations and lectures;
2 hours a week;
2 units
A course on the methods of reasoning, syllogisms, arguments and expositions, deductions, the truth table demonstrating invalidity and inconsistency of arguments. It also includes the logical organization of legal language and logical testing of judicial reasoning.
LEGAL WRITING
Lectures, reading and practical work;
2 hours a week;
2 units
An introduction to legal writing techniques; it involves applied legal bibliography, case digesting and reporting analysis, legal reasoning and preparation of legal opinions or memoranda.
BASIC LEGAL ETHICS
Cases, recitations and lectures;
3 hours a week;
3 units
A course that focuses on the canons of legal ethics involving the duties and responsibilities of the lawyer with respect to the public or society, the bar or legal profession, the courts and the client.
The LEB mandate that law schools offer 
specifically
 described subjects during a specific semester is a manifest violation of academic freedom, both individual and institutional.
[51]
 It does not only deprive the faculty member of his or her academic right to design the coverage of the course and to conduct classes as he or she sees fit, but also unreasonably usurps the academic institution's right to decide for itself 1) the subjects law students must take (core subjects) and the subjects law students may opt to take (non-core subjects/electives); 2) the coverage and content of each subject; and 3) the sequence by which the subjects should be taken.
The abuse of power does not end there.
The LEB has not only taken it upon itself to require subjects such as 
Agrarian Law and Social Legislation
,
[52]
 
Special Issues in International Law
,
[53]
 and 
Human Rights Law
,
[54]
 which are subjects of special interest or specialization that law schools may have only previously offered as electives, it has also usurped the institution's right to design and develop its own electives. Significantly, LEBMO No. 1-2011 provides a list of "suggested" electives,
[55]
 including but not limited to the following:
SUGGESTED ELECTIVES (DESCRIPTION)
x x x x
JURIS DOCTOR (J.D.) PROGRAM
ADMIRALTY
The course covers the history or the genesis of the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, up to the advent of the contentious Hague Rules of 1924, Hague Visby Rules of 1968 and Hamburg Rules of 1978, including aspects of bills of lading, charter parties, collision, salvage, towage, pilotage, and the Ship Mortgage Act. (2 units)
ADVANCED TAXATION
A seminar designed for students who are seriously considering tax practice. It examines the procedural requirements of the Internal Revenue Code. This includes a detailed look at the audit process from the examination of a return, and ending with a consideration of the questions surrounding the choice of a forum when litigation is appropriate. It also exposes students to some of the intellectual rigors of a high level tax practice. (Prerequisites: Taxation I and Taxation II) (2 units)
APPELLATE PRACTICE AND BRIEF MAKING
The course is designed to provide students with the skills necessary to successfully litigate appeals before the Court of Appeals and Supreme Court. Emphasis will be placed on practical training including appellate procedure, oral and written presentation and methodology. Brief writing and other aspects of modern appellate practice are also covered. (2 units)
ARBITRATION LAWS
A study of the Philippine laws on Arbitration, the ICC Rules on Arbitration, the Conventions on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, and the settlement of investment disputes between states and nationals of other states. (2 units)
BANKING LAW I (GENERAL BANKING)
The course covers the study of the rules and regulations governing banks and non-bank financial intermediaries, including the New Central Bank Act, the General Banking Law of 2000, and Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas circulars, rules and regulations. (2 units)
BANKING LAWS II (INVESTMENT BANKING)
A study of the Finance Company Act, the Investment House Law and the Investment Company Act, and related Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and Securities and Exchange Commission regulations. (1 unit)
CHILDREN'S RIGHTS LAW
This elective course aims to introduce the students to the legal framework of protection for children and the psycho-social dimensions of handling children's rights cases. The Convention on the Rights of the Child is used to provide the background on an international level. The course is divided further into specific clusters of rights of children in relation to Philippine laws, issuances, rules of court and jurisprudence. In each cluster the legal and psycho-social issues affecting certain groups of children (sexually and physically abused children in conflict with the law, child laborers, children in situations of armed conflict, trafficked children, displaced and refugee children, indigenous children, etc. . .) are discussed in order to understand in a holistic manner the plight of children within the legal system. The methods used in teaching the course include lectures, workshop exercises and mock trial. Students will also be exposed to actual case handling. (2 units)
CLINICAL LEGAL EDUCATION I AND II
Supervised student practice under Rule 138-A (Law Student Practice Rule) of the Rules of Court including conference with clients, preparation of pleadings and motions, appearance in court, handling of trial, preparation of memorandum. The course will include the use of video equipments and computers to enhance training in direct and cross-examination techniques. (4 units)
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTIONS
An introduction to the collective bargaining process, negotiations, mediation, and arbitration as experienced in both the private and government sectors, with emphasis on practice. (2 units)
[56]
While suggesting electives may be acceptable and even commendable, LEB Memorandum Order No. 14, Series of 2018 (LEBMO No. 14-2018) has 1) atrociously 
prohibited
 law schools from offering elective subjects not falling within the LEB's "suggested" list of electives, without prior LEB approval
[57]
 and 2) penalized the same with fines, and threats of downgrading, phase out, and/or eventual closure.
[58]
 This is grave abuse of the power to prescribe "
basic
 curricula."
Further, and as equally appalling, the LEB now mandates a prescribed sequence, again under pain of downgrading, phase-out, and eventual closure,
[59]
 by which subjects must be taken. LEBMO No. 2-2013 provides:
Section 4. Advanced Subjects and Back Subjects.
 As a general rule, a student shall not be permitted to take any advanced subject until he has satisfactorily passed the prerequisite subject or subjects.
In relation thereto, LEB Memorandum Order No. 5, Series of 2016 (LEBMO No. 5-2016) dictates "what subjects need to be taken and passed by students in the basic law courses before being allowed to take the advanced subjects"
[60]
 as follows:
ADVANCED SUBJECT(S)
PRE-REQUISITE SUBJECT(S)
Administrative and Election Laws or Administrative Law, Law on Public Officers and Election Law
Constitutional Law I
Agency, Trust and Partnership
Obligations and Contracts
Civil Law Review I
Persons and Family Relations
 Property
 Succession
Civil Law Review II
Civil Law Review I
Civil Procedure
Persons and Family Relations
Obligations and Contracts
Commercial Law Review
Agency, Trust and Partnership
Transportation
Credit Transaction
 Corporation Law
 Negotiable Instruments Law
Insurance
Constitutional Law Review
Constitutional Law I
 Constitutional Law II
Criminal Law Review 
Criminal Law I
Criminal Law II
Credit Transaction
Obligations and Contracts
Criminal Law II 
Criminal Law I
Criminal Procedure
Criminal Law I
Criminal Law II
Evidence
Criminal Procedure
Civil Procedure
Human Rights Law
Constitutional Law II
Insurance
Obligations and Contracts
Labor Law II 
Labor Law I
Labor Law Review
Labor Law I
Labor Law II
Legal Forms
Obligations and Contracts
Property
Sales
Credit Transactions
 Negotiable Instruments Law
 Agency, Trust and Partnership
 Land Titles and Deeds
Criminal Procedure
Civil Procedure
Legal Counseling and Social Responsibility
Basic Legal Ethics
 Problem Areas in Legal Ethics
 Criminal Procedure
 Civil Procedure
Evidence
Legal Medicine
Criminal Law II
Obligations and Contracts
Persons and Family Relations
Practice Court I
Criminal Procedure
Civil Procedure
Evidence
Special Proceedings
Legal Forms
Practice Court II
Practice Court I
Problem Areas in Legal Ethics
Basic Legal Ethics
Property
Obligations and Contracts
Remedial Law Review I
Criminal Procedure
Civil Procedure
Evidence
Special Proceedings
Remedial Law Review II
Remedial Law Review I
Sales
Obligations and Contracts
Special Proceedings
Succession
Succession
Persons and Family Relations 
Property
Taxation I
Constitutional Law I
Taxation II
Persons and Family Property
Taxation I
Succession
Torts and Damages
Obligations and Contracts
Transportation
Obligations and Contracts
The foregoing cannot, in any way, be construed as falling within the' LEB's power to prescribe 
basic
 curricula. The basis for delineating "preÂ­-requisites" vis-a-vis "advanced subjects" is not only arbitrary, it is fundamentally flawed. To illustrate:
1) 
Persons and Family Relations
 has been made a pre-requisite for 
Obligations and Contracts
, while 
Persons and Family Property
 and Succession have been made pre-requisites for 
Taxation II
,
[61]
 even though knowledge of the aforementioned "pre-requisite" may not necessarily be essential for studying the corresponding "advanced subject;"
2)
Persons and Family Relations, Property
, and 
Succession
 have been made pre-requisites to 
Civil Law Review I
 and 
Civil Law Review II
, but curiously, 
Obligations and Contracts
 was not made a preÂ­-requisite for either of the Civil Law Review subjects;
[62]
3)
Agency, Trust and Partnerships
 has been made a pre-requisite for 
Commercial Law Review
,
[63]
 even though it has traditionally been treated as a Civil Law subject in the Bar; and
4)
Legal Forms
 (a mere 2-unit subject) has been arbitrarily assigned 9 pre-requisites while 
Practice Court
 (which is not even a Bar subject) has been assigned 5 pre-requisites.
[64]
The inflexibility of the mandate has also, as Dean Candelaria explained, "led to implementation problems affecting student tenure, faculty assignments, 
tuition rates
, among others."
[65]
 Upon being asked to elaborate, he further elucidated on this matter during the oral arguments, to wit:
DEAN CANDELARIA:
x x x [O]n student tenure, there had been changes in recent years, whereby they add or split courses. I'll give you an example concretely. When I took Administrative Law, it was offered with Public Corporation, I think it was also with Election Law, and Public Officers. That has been the experience for a long time. In more recent times, there had been splits by the Legal Education Board, and the problem that students who have taken it, or who are about to take it for instance, would be displaced in terms of the ladder of courses that they will take. So, we've had students who have had tenure problems, because they have to take one which, at that time, was actually not offered so, there is an administrative problem imputing the number of units, that's one concrete problem. On faculty for instance, the assignment, there have been changes when it comes to faculty assignments and I think the problem with many law schools also, is hiring. Faculty members who may have to teach new courses also that are now being required by the Legal Education Board. I think for instance, Environmental Law. I know Environmental Law is booming in this country, there is a roster of lawyers right now who have gone into Environmental Law. But there are other subjects, of course, that are being introduced that may really be not, I think, easily taught by incumbent faculty members. 
And the last one is tuition rates. When you start tampering with the number of units, in a law school operation, and recommending changes, it will affect tuition rates for many law schools. At least those who are reliant on private tuition.
[66]
 (Emphasis and underscoring supplied)
While the Court does not pass upon questions regarding the wisdom of the LEB's prescribed curriculum, 
the Court is duty-bound to uphold an educational institution's right to determine and evaluate the propriety of assigning pre-requisites as an aspect of its right to determine what to teach and how to do so
.
If only to highlight the gross and patent abuse by the LEB of its power to prescribe the 
basic
 curricula, it bears emphasis that the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), which was empowered to set "(a) minimum unit requirements for specific academic programs; (b) general education distribution requirements as may be determined by the Commission; and (c) specific professional subjects as may be stipulated by the various licensing entities,"
[67]
 
subject to
 an educational institution's academic right to "curricular freedom,"
[68]
 has only seen fit to 
recommend
 sample curricula and sample syllabi to meet a minimum set of desired 
program outcomes
. For instance, CHED Memorandum Order No. 041-17,
[69]
 which prescribes the Standards and Guidelines for Journalism majors, states:
Per Section 13 of RA 7722, the higher education institution shall exercise academic freedom in its curricular offerings but must comply with the minimum requirements for specific academic programs, the general education distribution requirements and the specific professional courses.
Section 3.
 The Articles that follow set minimum standards and other requirements and prescriptions that all HEIs must adopt. These standards are expressed as a minimum set of 
desired program outcomes
, as enumerated under Article IV, Section 6. The CHED designed the curricula to attain such outcomes. These curricula are shown in Article V, Section 9 as 
sample curricula
. The numbers of units for these curricula are herein prescribed as the "minimum unit requirement" pursuant to Section 13 of RA 7722. In designing the curricula, the CHED employed a curriculum map for each program, 
samples
 of which are shown in Article V, Section 10.
Using an outcomes-based approach, the CHED also determined the appropriate curriculum delivery methods shown in Article V, Section 11. The 
sample course syllabus
 given in Article V, Section 12 shows some of these methods.
x x x x
Section 4. In recognition of the HEIs' vision, mission and contexts under which they operate, the HEIs may design curricula suited to their own needs. However, the HEIs must demonstrate that the same leads to the attainment of the required minimum set of outcomes. In the same vein, they have latitude in terms of curriculum delivery and in specifying and deploying human and physical resources as long as they attain the program outcomes and satisfy program educational objectives.
 (Emphasis and underscoring supplied)
Similarly worded provisions appear in the Standards and Guidelines for degrees in Computer Engineering,
[70]
 Political Science,
[71]
 Communications,
[72]
 Business Administration,
[73]
 Statistics,
[74]
 Education,
[75]
 among others.
In contrast with the 
curricular flexibility
 provided by the CHED, the LEB did not merely prescribe minimum unit requirements, desired program outcomes, or a sample curricula. The LEB gravely abused its authority and violated the law schools' curricular freedom when it 
imposed
 the aboveÂ­described curriculum, 
usurped
 the lawschools' right to determine appropriate pre-requisites and 
prohibited
 law schools from designing their own electives.
Clearly, the right to formulate the curriculum belongs to the educational institutions, subject to reasonable guidelines that may be provided by the State. On the dangers of having the State actually prescribe what may be taught in educational institutions of higher learning, the Constitutional Commissioners had this to say:
FR. BERNAS. 
What I am concerned about, and I am sure the committee is concerned about also, is 
the danger always of the State prescribing subjects
.
 I recall that when the sponsor was the dean of Arts and Sciences in La Salle, his association of private school deans was precisely fighting the various prescriptions imposed by the State - that the schools must teach this, must teach that. Are we opening that up here?
MR. VILLACORTA. The Commissioner is right in describing these as guidelines. This is not to say that there will be specific subjects that will embody these principles on a one to-one correspondence. In other words, we are not saying that there should be a subject called nationalism or ecology. That was what we were fighting against in the Association of Philippine Colleges of Arts and Sciences. The government always came up with what they called thrusts, and therefore the corresponding subjects imposed on schools that are supposed to embody these thrusts. So, we had current issues. It was a course that was required on the tertiary level. Then there was a time when they required subjects that dealt with green revolution; and then agrarian reform. Taxation is in fact still a required course. 
We are not thinking in those terms. These are merely guidelines.
FR. BERNAS. 
In other words, while the State will give the goals and guidelines, as it were, how these are to be attained is to be determined by the institution by virtue of its academic freedom.
MR. VILLACORTA. That is right, Mr. Presiding Officer. I invite, of course, my fellow members in the committee who might have some reservations on the points I raised.
FR. BERNAS. But I guess what I am trying to point out is: Are we really serious about academic freedom?
MR. VILLACORTA. Definitely, we are. Would the Commissioner have certain misgivings about the way we defined it?
FR. BERNAS. I would, 
if the committee goes beyond mere guidelines, because if we allow the State to start dictating what subjects should be taught and how these would be taught, I think it would be very harmful for the educational system
. Usually, legislation is done by legislators who are not educators and who know very little about education. 
Perhaps education should be left largely to educators, with certain supervision, and so forth.
MR. VILLACORTA. Excuse me, Mr. Presiding Officer, if I may interject. I am sure the Honorable Bernas, being very much experienced in education, is aware of the fact that there is this great need to develop certain priority concerns in the molding of our youths' mind and behavior. For example, love of country is something that is very lacking in our society and I wonder if the Honorable Bernas would have any reservation against giving emphasis to nationalism.
FR. BERNAS. I have nothing against motherhood concepts, Mr. Presiding Officer.
MR. VILLACORTA. But this is always the dilemma of educators. To what extent do we give freedom as to the subject matter and manner of teaching versus certain imperatives of national development? In the last dispensation, we found a lopsided importance given to so-called national development which turned out to be just serving the interest of the leadership. The other members of the committee are fully aware of the dangers inherent in the State spelling out the priorities in education, but at the same time, we cannot overlook the fact that there are certain areas which must be emphasized in a developing society. Of course, we would wish that we shall not always be a developing society bereft of economic development as well as national unity. But we like the advise of the Honorable Bernas, as well as our colleagues in the Commission, on how we can constitutionalize certain priorities in educational development as well as curricular development without infringing necessarily on the goals of academic freedom. Moreover, jurisprudence accords academic freedom only to institutions of higher learning.
FR. BERNAS. So, I am quite satisfied that 
these are guidelines
.
[76]
 (Emphasis and underscoring supplied)
In sum, the LEB's authority to prescribe the "basic curricula" is limited by the Constitutional right of law schools to academic freedom and to the due process standard of reasonableness. When the LEB (or any branch of government for that matter) interferes with Constitutional rights and freedoms and overreaches its authority, 
as it has done in this case
, it is the Court's Constitutional duty to make it tow the line.
iii. How to teach
As regards the aspect of academic freedom on 
how to teach
, several issuances of the LEB readily reveal that, over the years, the LEB has exercised considerable power in 
controlling
, and not merely recommending or supervising, the manner by which legal education institutions and law school professors conduct the teaching of law courses.
To cite a concrete example of how the LEB interferes with the law schools' right to determine the manner of instruction, the LEB issued LEBMO No. 1-2011, which, as earlier discussed, introduced policies and standards of legal education and provided for a manual of regulations for law schools. 
The said LEBMO is riddled with various rules, regulations, and restrictions that go into the manner by which law schools teach their students.
For instance, according to Section 18(a) of LEBMO No. 1-2011, with respect to the LLB curriculum, the LEB requires law schools to complete the teaching of all subjects in the LLB curriculum within the entire semester as prescribed by the model curriculum provided in the LEBMO. Law schools are prohibited from completing the curriculum in 
modular fashion, i.e.
, completing the subject by a class held continuously for a number of days, although satisfying the required number of hours. Evidently, the manner by which the law schools implement its curriculum is restricted.
The said provision also prohibits distance education, unless otherwise provided for by the LEB. For instance, if a law school professor wishes to conduct class through a video teleconference when he/she is, temporarily outside of the country, because LEBMO No. 1-2011 prohibits distance education unless approved by the LEB, the professor cannot do so. Clearly, this illustrates how the LEB interferes with the professors' prerogative to determine what methods they will employ in teaching their respective classes.
Further, under Section 18(c), the LEB imposes the total number of credits that shall be awarded to a student pursuing his/her LLM, as well as the specific number of units to be credited upon a successful defense before a Panel of Oral Examiners. The said provision also dictates upon the law school the specific type of output that a student must submit in a non-thesis master's program. Similarly, under Section 18(d), the issuance not only determines the minimum academic credits as regards the degree of SID or DCL; even the specific number of pages of a doctoral dissertation is imposed, 
i.e.
, 200 pages. In fact, under Section 20 of the same issuance, legal education institutions are mandated to utilize internet access and to put up a Moot Court room in the process of teaching their students.
With respect to assessing the respective faculties of the law schools, under Section 41.2 of the issuance, the LEB is allowed to revoke the permits or recognitions given to legal education institutions when the LEB deems that there is gross incompetence on the part of the dean and the corps of professors or instructors. Simply stated, under the issuance, the LEB is permitted to assess the teaching performance of law school faculty members and mete out penalties in line with such assessment. The evaluation of the performance and competence of faculty members is part and parcel of a law school's right to determine its own manner of instruction. 
Worse, the said issuance is silent as to how the LEB gauges gross incompetence.
As discussed earlier, under Section 58 of LEBMO No. 1-2011, the LEB prescribes course specifications, wherein the names of the courses, the number of units per course, the number of hours to be spent per week, and the various methods of instruction that must be utilized are dictated upon the legal education institution and the law school professors who teach the various courses indicated therein.
As a glaring example, under Section 58.1 of the aforesaid issuance, on the course of 
Persons and Family Relations
 in the LLB program, the instructor is specifically required to conduct "[c]ases, recitations and lectures" for 4 hours a week. For 
Legal Technique and Logic
, on the other hand, the teaching methods prescribed are limited to "[r]ecitations and lectures" only, for 2 hours per week. Does this mean that professors who teach 
Persons and Family Relations and Legal Technique and Logic
 are discouraged, or worse, prohibited, to require group work or group presentations in their respective classes, considering that these methods of instruction were not included in the course specifications? That seems to be the case, based on a reading of the said issuance.
To stress, as clearly illustrated in the foregoing examples, the LEB, through LEBMO No. 1-2011, 
dictates with much particularity and, therefore, unduly restricts
 the method of teaching that may be adopted by the law school professors. This does not merely encroach on the academic freedom of the legal education institutions as to how to teach; the academic freedom of the faculty members themselves is directly infringed.
It must equally be stressed that the imposition of the course specifications provided under LEBMO No. 1-2011 is not merely recommendatory. It is 
mandatory
 in nature, considering that under Section 58 of the issuance, the law schools may provide their own course descriptions 
only
 when the same are not provided under the issuance and if in conformity with the subject titles stated in the model curricula provided in the issuance.
Astonishingly, under Section 59 of LEBMO No. 1-2011, the LEB even imposes specific rules and regulations on the manner by which the law schools grade its students. Law schools are even required to submit their grading system and a complete explanation thereof before the LEB.
To further illustrate how the LEB meddles with the right of the law schools to determine their own grading system, Section 59(a) specifies certain factors that must be considered by the law school professor in determining the student's final grade, 
i.e.
, "[p]articipation in class through recitation, exchange of ideas, presentation of reports, and group discussion."
Under Section 59(b), law schools are forced to drop students who incur absences totaling 20% of the total number of contact hours or required hours (units) for the subject. Worse, law schools are required to inscribe the entry "FA" (Failed due to Absences) in the student's official transcript of records.
Section 59(d), on the other hand, interferes with the law schools' management of their respective apprenticeship programs. Under the said provision, when apprenticeship is required by the law school and the student does not complete the mandated number of apprenticeship hours, or the person supervising the apprenticeship program deems the performance of the student unsatisfactory, the law school dean is forced to "require of the student such number of hours more in apprenticeship as will fulfill the purposes of the apprenticeship program."
Also, under Section 59(e), when a program requires the submission and defense of a thesis, in a situation where a student fails to submit or receives a failing grade, the issuance directs law schools to allow students to "improve, correct or change the thesis and present it anew for the evaluation of the law school, through its dean or the professor assigned to direct thesis-writing." It is readily apparent that the very manner by which legal education institutions conduct their thesis program is interfered with.
Beyond LEBMO No. 1-2011, various rules and regulations that interfere in the legal education institutions' right to determine their manner of teaching are likewise found in LEBMO No. 2-2013.
In the said issuance, the LEB imposes several restrictions as to the allowable load of students in the law schools. As previously discussed, under Section 4 of LEBMO No. 2-2013, students are not permitted to take any advanced subject until passing prerequisite subjects. Further, under Section 5, the LEB sets the maximum number of academic units in excess of the normal load that may be allowed for graduating students, 
i.e.
, six units. Under Sections 6 and 8, the requirements for the cross enrollment and transfer of students from one law school to another, respectively, are imposed.
Several impositions are also made even on the most miniscule of details regarding the request, transfer, and release of school records and transfer credentials.
[77]
 Interestingly, even the 
format
 of the school records is forced upon the law schools, as found in Section 7
[78]
 of the issuance. Under Section 12, the rules on denial of final examinations, withholding of grades, and refusal to re-enroll are likewise dictated upon the legal education institutions.
Under Section 14 of LEBMO No. 2-2013, which mirrors Section 59(b) of LEBMO No. 1-2011, the LEB requires that professors fail students who incur absences of more than 20% of the prescribed number of class hours. This provision is a clear example of how the LEB directly interferes with the law professors' freedom to manage their respective classes.
LEBMO No. 2-2013 even imposes upon the legal education institutions the manner by which they should conduct their respective apprenticeship programs, determining the list of specific activities that should be required for students undergoing the apprenticeship programs.
[79]
As regards the law schools' right to determine which of their students are eligible to graduate, Section 16 of the issuance imposes residency requirements for graduation, establishing the rule that no student shall be allowed to graduate from any law school where he or she has not established academic residency for at least the two last semesters of his or her course of study. In fact, to further underscore the high level of interference and overreach exercised by the LEB, LEBMO No. 2-2013 even imposes upon the law schools certain rules on determining which students may participate in the commencement exercise of the law schools.
[80]
The interference of the LEB with the manner by which law schools implement their curriculum is so pervasive that, under LEBMO No. 2-2013, in order for a law school to open another branch
[81]
 or hold extension classes,
[82]
 prior approval of the LEB is required.
[83]
Aside from the foregoing provisions of the LEBMO, I invite the Court's attention to Article III of the said issuance, which imposes numerous restrictions on 
the power of law schools to maintain discipline and to determine the manner by which they conduct administrative proceedings
.
For example, under Section 20, the LEB forces upon law schools certain rules on when and how they can preventively suspend, suspend, expel, and not readmit their students.
The law school may only preventively suspend a student "when the evidence of guilt is strong and the Dean is morally convinced that the continued stay of the student pending investigation would cause sufficient distraction to the normal operations of the law school, or would pose real or imminent threat or danger to persons and property inside the law school's premises."
[84]
If the law school decides to suspend a student, its action constrained to denying the erring student from attending classes for a period not exceeding 20% of the prescribed total class days for the school term.
[85]
With respect to the penalty of non-readmission, when meeting out the said penalty, the law school is forced to allow the student to complete the current school term when the resolution for non-readmission was promulgated. The law school is likewise mandated to issue the transfer credentials of the erring student upon promulgation.
[86]
As regards the penalty of exclusion, the LEB allows the law schools to mete out such penalty "for acts or offenses such as dishonesty, hazing that involves physical, moral or psychological violence that does not result in death of a student, carrying deadly weapons, immorality, selling and/or possession of prohibited drugs, drug dependency, drunkenness, hooliganism, vandalism and other offenses analogous to the foregoing."
[87]
The said issuance also confines the power of law schools to expel a student. Under LEBMO No. 2-2013, the permissible instances when law schools can expel a student are limited to (a) participation of a student as a principal in a fraternity hazing that results in the death of a law student; (b) unlawful physical assault of higher education institution officials inside the school campus; and (c) commission of an offense with an imposable minimum penalty of more than 12 years.
[88]
 Hence, based on this provision, if a student participates in a fraternity hazing wherein the death of a non-law student occurs, absurdly, the law school has no power to expel a student.
Further, in cases wherein the administrative charge filed against a student amounts to a criminal offense, Section 22 of the LEBMO requires law schools to proceed with the administrative proceedings until termination even if the criminal case has not yet been decided by the court.
Notably, under Section 19 of LEBMO No. 2-2013, if the law school imposes a sanction of expulsion against a student, the student may appeal the disciplinary action meted out by the school before the LEB. 
The latter is empowered under the LEBMO to 
reverse and set aside
 the school's decision to expel the student.
 Without a shred of doubt, this is a clear derogation of the law school's right to discipline its students.
It must be emphasized that the right of the school to discipline its students is an integral aspect of the academic freedom of how to teach.
[89]
 Because the schools' power to instill discipline in their students is subsumed in their academic freedom, the Court has generally adopted a stance of deference and non-interference, declining to meddle with the right of schools to impose disciplinary sanctions, which includes the power to dismiss or expel, students who violate disciplinary rules.
[90]
 In fact, the power of schools to discipline their students is so established and recognized that, in our jurisprudence, even the power to impose disciplinary measures has extended to schools even after graduation for any act done by the student prior thereto.
[91]
Hence, the various rules imposed by the LEB that control and unduly restrict the law schools' determination of the manner by which they discipline their students undoubtedly amount to a serious breach of their academic freedom to determine how to teach.
Another exemplar of the LEB's unwarranted and undue interference in the law schools' prerogative to control the manner of instruction is LEB Memorandum Order No. 10, Series of 2017 (LEBMO No. 10-2017), which imposes guidelines on the adoption of the academic/school calendar. While the said LEBMO allows law schools to establish their own academic/school calendars and set their own opening dates, it nevertheless restrictively confines the academic/school calendar to no less than 36 weeks, wherein the total number of days shall not be less than 200 per calendar year. Moreover, the issuance requires law schools to set the start of their school calendar not earlier than the last week of May, but not later than the last day of August. The law schools' discretion to determine the amount of weeks and days in their academic/school calendars, as well as the period of commencement of the academic year, is clipped.
The aforementioned issuances and their provisions are but examples of how the LEB has exercised the power of control - not supervision - over the legal education institutions' rights to determine the manner by which law courses are taught and how such institutions manage their internal affairs.
iv. Who may be admitted
With respect to the academic freedom aspect of who may be admitted to the schools, I reiterate my position that the 
ponencia
 is correct in holding that the PhiLSAT is violative of academic freedom. Mandating legal education institutions to reject examinees who failed to obtain the prescribed passing score amounts to a 
complete transfer of control
 over student admissions from the law schools to the LEB. To emphasize, the permissible power of the State over institutions of higher learning is limited to supervision and regulation, 
not control
.
Beyond the PhiLSAT, however, the LEB has imposed other restrictions that similarly interfere with the law school's right to determine who to admit and teach.
Under LEBMO No. 1-2011, where the applicant for admission into a law school is a graduate of a foreign institution, instead of allowing the law schools to determine for themselves whether to admit the student or not, the matter is referred exclusively to the LEB, who shall determine the eligibility of the candidate for admission to law school.
[92]
 Hence, under the LEBMO, the LEB is given complete control and discretion as to the admissions of foreign graduates. This is a clear derogation of the right of law schools to determine who to admit.
Further, under Section 16 of the same LEBMO, the LEB forces law schools to reject applicants for admission to the LLB or JD program of studies who failed to earn at least 18 units in English, 6 units in Mathematics, and 18 units of social science subjects. 
Such requirement has no basis under the Rules of Court or under any law.
 The aforesaid requirement is purely the creation of the LEB. The same may be said with respect to the rules on the prerequisites for admission to graduate programs in law imposed under Section 17.
B. Other Issues Under the LEB Law
i. LEB's power to accredit is too broad and unreasonable
Beyond the four essential aspects of academic freedom, several other issuances of the LEB may also be classified as unreasonable.
Under R.A. 7662, the LEB is empowered to supervise and regulate law schools or legal educational institutions through accreditation.
[93]
 Without encroaching upon the schools' academic freedom, the LEB shall set the standards of accreditation, taking into account, among others, "the size of enrollment, the qualifications of the members of the faculty, the library and other facilities."
[94]
 Educational institutions may only operate a law school upon accreditation by the LEB.
[95]
 Should the law school fail to maintain these standards, the LEB may withdraw or downgrade its accreditation.
[96]
 To implement the provisions of R.A. 7662, the LEB issued LEBMO No. 1-2011 entitled 
Policies and Standards of Legal Education and Manual of Regulations for Law Schools
.
Under LEBMO No. 1-2011, accreditation is either 
mandatory or voluntary
.
[97]
 With mandatory accreditation, a law school is authorized and recognized by the LEB to operate and to endorse its graduates for the Bar Examinations.
[98]
 On the other hand, voluntary accreditation "refers to the processes that may be devised by private accrediting agencies, recognized by [the LEB], that confer marks of distinction on law schools that surpass the minimum requirements and standards" under LEBMO No. 1-2011.
[99]
 Mandatory accreditation consists of two stages: 
Permit Stage and Recognition Stage
.
[100]
 A Permit status, which must be obtained before each academic year, allows the law school to open and offer subjects of the first year of the law curriculum.
[101]
 Meanwhile, a Recognition status constitutes full mandatory accreditation which allows the law school's students to graduate, to be conferred.degrees and to be endorsed to the Office of the Bar Confidant for the Bar Examinations.
[102]
R.A. 7662 provides that the grant, denial, withdrawal and downgrading of a school's accreditation must be subject to the standards to be set by theÂ· LEB. Under LEBMO No. 1-2011, some of these standards are that a law, school: (a) shall be headed by a properly qualified dean;
[103]
 (b) shall maintain a corps of professors drawn from the ranks of leading and acknowledged practitioners as well as academics and legal scholars or experts in juridical science;
[104]
 (c) shall be properly equipped with the necessities of legal education, particularly library facilities, including reliable internet access, as well as suitable classrooms and a Moot Court room;
[105]
 (d) shall have a faculty lounge for the convenience of members of the faculty;
[106]
 and (e) shall publish a research journal.
[107]
 A. private higher education institution applying for Permit status to open a law school must include in its application, among others, the present library holdings, as well as the name and qualifications of the law librarian, and pictures of the classrooms, moot court, library, dean's office, and faculty lounge.
[108]
Verily, I find these standards to be unreasonable impositions on law schools, if not a patent violation of their academic freedom, as previously discussed.
Moreover, some of the provisions in LEBMO No. 1-2011 lack legal basis in R.A. 7662 and can be classified as arbitrary. Consider the following: (a) the LEB shall assure accessibility of legal education by seeing to the proportional distribution of law schools throughout the country;
[109]
 (b) in the exercise of LEB's "sound discretion," it may deny an application to open another law school "if x x x there is/are existing law school/s which adequately serve/s the legal education needs" in a given area;
[110]
 and (c) it may also deny an application if it determines based on the records that a law school is "substandard in the quality of its operation or when surrounding circumstances make it very difficult for it to form a suitable faculty, or for any valid and weighty reasons," it could not deliver quality legal education.
[111]
 Further, in spite of the serious consequences of the denial of recognition, 
i.e.
, closure or phase out of the law school, there is no provision on grounds for such denial.
[112]
Lastly, LEBMO No. 1-2011 also provides that the LEB shall take "cognizance of all matters involving acts or omissions" in relation to R.A. 7662, related laws and issuances and it may impose administrative sanctions.
[113]
 While these sanctions are not defined in the said issuance, it may be inferred that it refers to a denial, withdrawal or downgrading of a law school's accreditation.
The above provisions show that the LEB's discretion to grant, deny, withdraw or downgrade a school's accreditation is too broad and overreaching, contrary to the constitutional provisions on reasonable supervision and regulation and on academic freedom.
Other issuances of the LEB which are seemingly void for being either unreasonable or issued 
ultra vires
 are as follows:
LEB Resolution No. 7, Series of 2010 (LEB Resolution No. 7-2010), Declaring a 3-Year Moratorium on the Opening of New Law Schools - The Whereas Clauses stated that: (a) based on LEB's opinion, the 128 law schools as of that time are more than enough; (b) the proliferation of law schools has been identified as one of the causes of the poor quality of legal education; and (c) the LEB needs a 3-year period to inspect and monitor the performances of existing law schools and "to focus on the introduction of reform measures in our legal education system." Thus, the LEB declared a 3 year moratorium on opening of new law schools.
This unilateral declaration, 
which is merely based on the LEB's opinion
, seems to have been undertaken without consultation with stakeholders, specifically the law schools, which the LEB plans to inspect and monitor.
LEB Resolution No. 16, Series of 2011 (LEB Resolution 16-2011)Â­ The LEB considers a small student population in a law school as not financially viable and would result in "substandard legal education," unless subsidized by the management. Thus, a law school with less than 15 students in the first semester of the first level or with a school population of less than 60 students is required to explain in writing why it should be allowed to continue its operations or what remedial measures it shall undertake to address the low enrollment.
It seems that the LEB has arbitrarily determined that a law school with a school population of less than 60 students is not financially viable unless subsidized by the management. 
As stated in the Whereas Clause, the basis for LEB's conclusion that the cost of legal education determines its quality is merely stated as "experience, observation and information."
 To my mind, the LEB cannot dictate to a law school whether or not it is financially viable to continue its operation as the latter can, and should make its own business decisions.
LEB Memorandum Circular No. 2, Series of 2017 (LEBMC No. 2-2017), Submission of Schedule of Tuition and Other School Fees - All law schools are reminded to follow section/paragraph 13 of LEB Memorandum Order No.8, Series of 2016 (LEBMO No. 8-2016), 
i.e.
, to submit to the LEB the approved schedule of tuition and other school fees for S.Y. 2015-2016 and S.Y. 2016-2017. This Circular also provides that failure to seasonably submit the said schedule will bar the non-compliant law school from increasing its tuition and other school fees in S.Y. 2017-2018.
This Circular's provision on barring a non-compliant law school from increasing its tuition and other fees has no legal basis and constitutes undue interference with the law school's management and operations.
LEB Memorandum Circular No, 4, Series of 2017 (LEBMC No. 4-2017), Reminder to Submit Duly Accomplished LSIR Form - The LEB reminded the law schools to submit the Law School Information Report (LSIR) Form for the second semester of AY 2016-2017 as required under LEB Memorandum Order No. 6, Series of 2016, (LEBMO No. 6-2016). This Circular also served as a "warning" that "non-compliant law schools shall be subject to appropriate administrative sanctions, including the imposition of fine up to P10,000."
It is not clear what these "appropriate administrative sanctions" are. Moreover, it is also unclear what the legal basis is for the said administrative sanctions and for the imposition of fine up to P10,000.00.
LEB Memorandum Circular No. 6, Series of 2017 (LEBMC No. 6-2017), Applications for LEB Certification Numbers - This Circular provides that, in lieu of Special Orders issued by the CHED, legal education institutions are required under LEB Resolution No. 2012-02 to secure LEB Certification Numbers for graduating students of law programs. This issuance also provides that "LEIs that graduate students without LEB Certification Numbers due to late submission of applications" shall be imposed the appropriate sanctions.
Similar to the previous issuances above, it is not clear what these sanctions are. In addition, 
the LEBMC unduly interferes with the management of the law schools regarding their graduating students
.
LEB Memorandum Order No. 16, Series of 2018 (LEBMO No. 16-2018), Policies, Standards, and Guidelines for the Academic Law Libraries of Law Schools - Pursuant to LEB Resolution No. 2018-207, this issuance contains detailed requirements for the operation of a law library, such as: (a) its size should "adequately contain the entire law collection and seat comfortably fifteen percent (15%)" of the entire law school population; (b) there should be an exclusive reading area for faculty members; (c) the operating hours shall not be less than 6 hours a day; (d) qualifications and development training of the librarian; (e) required number of copies and kinds of books, as well as foreign and online/digital sources; (f) if wireless internet connection is not available to students, the required number of internet workstations shall be increased to such number equivalent to the ratio of 1 for every 50 students; (g) transitory provisions which states that non-compliant law schools shall be given three (3) months to meet this issuance requirements; and (h) failure to meet any of the requirements shall constitute non-compliance with the prescribed minimum standards for the law program and shall be subject to the appropriate administrative sanctions under Nos. 1 and 2 of the said issuance,
While the objectives of providing for a good law library is laudable, the stringent requirements 
and its corresponding costs
 may strain the law school's resources, 
or worse, unduly burden the students with increased fees simply to allow the law school to immediately comply with the provisions of the said issuance
.
LEB Memorandum Order No. 18, Series of 2018 (LEBMO No. 18-2018), Guidelines on Cancellation or Suspension of Classes in All Law Schools - Pursuant to LEB Resolution No. 2018-344, this LEBMO provides that there will be automatic national suspension of classes upon declaration of the Office of the President or when Signal No. 3 is raised by Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration. Without these conditions, the suspension shall depend on Local Government Unit declaration.
Since this issuance merely provides for guidelines on cancellation or suspension of classes in law schools, it is bemusing that there is a clause therein which states that failure to comply with any of its provisions shall be subject to appropriate administrative sanctions under Nos. 1 and 2 of the said issuance.
These issuances by the LEB can evidently be classified as unreasonable and unduly burdensome to the operations of the law schools - which clearly go beyond its mandate. The LEB ought to be reminded that under administrative law, "administrative authorities should not act arbitrarily and capriciously in the issuance of rules and regulations. To be valid, such rules and regulations must be reasonable and fairly adapted to secure the end in view. If shown to bear no reasonable relation to the purposes for which they are authorized to be issued, then they must be held to be invalid."
[114]
ii. R.A. 7662's provision on law practice internship
With regard to the provision in R.A. 7662 empowering the LEB to impose an internship requirement as a prerequisite to take the Bar examinations, I agree with the 
ponencia
's ruling
[115]
 that the said provision of law is unconstitutional on its face. Section 7(g) of R.A. 7662 provides that the LEB is granted the power:
g) to establish a law practice internship as a requirement for taking the Bar which a law student shall undergo with any duly accredited private or public law office or firm or legal assistance group anytime during the law course for a specific period that the Board may decide, but not to exceed a total of twelve (12) months. For this purpose, the Board shall prescribe the necessary guidelines for such accreditation and the specifications of such internship which shall include the actual work of a new member of the Bar.
To my mind, the 
ponencia
 correctly holds that the aforequoted provision encroaches on the power of the Supreme Court to prescribe the requirement for admission to the Bar as provided under Section 2 of Rule 138 of the Rules of Court, to wit:
SEC. 2. 
Requirements for all applicants for admission to the bar
. - Every applicant for admission as a member of the bar must be a citizen of the Philippines, at least twenty-one years of age, of good moral character, and a resident of the Philippines; and must produce before the Supreme Court satisfactory evidence of good moral character, and that no charges against him, involving moral turpitude, have been filed or are pending in any court in the Philippines.
In his 
Amicus Brief
, Dean Candelaria also noted that some of the provisions of R.A. 7662 are in apparent conflict with the power of the Court to promulgate rules and that law practice internship and mandatory continuing legal education are both subjects of Court rules and issuances.
[116]
From the foregoing, it is my view that the 
ponencia
 was justified in striking down the particular provision of R.A. 7662 for being unconstitutional.
Conclusion
To end, I reiterate my agreement with the 
ponencia
's conclusions for the reasons I have already discussed above.
Verily, after a meticulous review of the circulars, memorandum orders and other issuances of the LEB, it has become apparent that the LEB has committed acts of overreach, clearly going beyond mere supervision of law schools. A careful analysis of how the LEB exercised and continues to exercise its powers readily reveals that the LEB is already unduly interfering and meddling with the law schools' right to determine who may teach, what may be taught, how to teach and who may be admitted to study. As illustrated above, the exercise of the LEB's powers are evidently beyond 
reasonable
 supervision and regulation by the State.
Perhaps, if the various LEB rules and regulations cited here were merely recommendatory in nature or were mere guidelines (following the intent of the Constitutional Commissioners), then the exercise of the LEB's power could possibly pass constitutional muster. 
However, this is not the case.
 As seen from the discussion above, the many issuances of the LEB were imposed on the law schools under pain of administrative sanctions - which include the closing down of the law school for non-compliance. 
The questionable issuances cited here show that the LEB is exercising the power to control, manage, dictate, overrule, prohibit and dominate the law schools - in absolute disregard of the Constitutional guarantee of academic freedom.
 As such, the Court is called upon 
in this case
 to curb the abuse, and to strike down these issuances for being violative of the Constitutional right of the law schools to exercise academic freedom.
In view of the foregoing, I concur with the 
ponencia
 in 
PARTLY GRANTING
 the petitions and in declaring the following:
The jurisdiction of the Legal Education Board over legal education is 
UPHELD
.
The Court further declares: 
As 
CONSTITUTIONAL
:
Section 7(c) of R.A. No. 7662 insofar as it gives the Legal Education Board the power to set the standards of accreditation for law schools taking into account, among others, the qualifications of the members of the faculty without encroaching upon the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning; and
Section 7(e) of. R.A. No. 7662 insofar as it gives the Legal Education Board the power to prescribe the minimum requirements for admission to legal education and minimum qualifications of faculty members without encroaching upon the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning.
As 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL
 for encroaching upon the power of the Court:
Section 2, par. 2 of R.A. No. 7662 insofar as it unduly includes "continuing legal education" as an aspect of legal education which is made subject to State supervision and control;
Section 3(a)(2) of R.A. No. 7662 and Section 7(2) of LEBMO No. 1-2011 on the objective of legal education to increase awareness among members of the legal profession of the needs of the poor, deprived and oppressed sectors of society;
Section 7(g) of R.A. No. 7662 and Section 11(g) of LEBMO No. 1-2011 insofar as it gives the Legal Education Board the power to establish a law practice internship as a requirement for taking the Bar; and
Section 7(h) of R.A. No. 7662 and Section 11(h) of LEBMO No. 1-2011 insofar as it gives the Legal Education Board the power to adopt a system of mandatory continuing legal education and to provide for the mandatory attendance of practicing lawyers in such courses and for such duration as it may deem necessary.
As 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL
 for being 
ultra vires
:
The act and practice of the Legal Education Board of excluding, restricting, and qualifying admissions to law schools in violation of the institutional academic freedom on who to admit, particularly:
Paragraph 9 of LEBMO No. 7-2016 which provides that all college graduates or graduating students applying for admission to the basic law course shall be required to pass the PhiLSAT as a requirement for admission to any law school in the Philippines and that no applicant shall be admitted for enrollment as a first year student in the basic law courses leading to a degree of either Bachelor of Laws or Juris Doctor unless he/she has passed the PhiLSAT taken within 2 years before the start of studies for the basic law course;
LEBMC No. 18-2018 which prescribes the taking and passing of the PhiLSAT as a prerequisite for admission to law schools.
Accordingly, the temporary restraining order issued on March 12, 2019 enjoining the Legal Education Board from implementing LEBMC No. 18-2018 is made 
PERMANENT
. The regular admission of students who were conditionally admitted and enrolled is left to the discretion of the law schools in the exercise of their academic freedom; and
Sections 15; 16, 17 of LEBMO No. 1-2011[.]
The act and practice of the Legal Education Board of dictating the qualifications and classification of faculty members, dean, and dean of graduate schools of law in violation of institutional academic freedom on who may teach, particularly:
Sections 41.2(d), 50, 51, and 52 of LEBMO No. 1-2011;
Resolution No. 2014-02;
Sections 31(2), 33, 34, and 35 of LEBMO No. 2; [and]
LEBMO No. 17, Series of 2018; and (sic)
The act and practice of the Legal Education Board of dictating the policies on the establishment of legal apprenticeship and legal internship programs in violation of institutional academic freedom on what to teach, particularly:
Resolution No. 2015-08;
Sections 24(c) of LEBMO No. 2; and
Sections 59(d) of LEBMO No. 1-2011.
[117]
Additionally, after reviewing the various issuances of the LEB beyond those covering the PhiLSAT, I also vote to declare the following as 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL
 for violating the institutional academic freedom of the law schools as well as the individual academic freedom of the law faculty:
The act and practice of the Legal Education Board of dictating the qualifications and classification of faculty members, dean, and dean of graduate schools of law in violation of institutional and individual academic freedom on 
who may teach
, particularly:
Sections 33.1(4), 33.1 (5), 34(d), 35(1) and 35(3) of LEBMO No. 1-2011.
The act and practice of the Legal Education Board of dictating the policies on the establishment of legal apprenticeship and legal internship programs, as well as its unreasonable intrusion into the formulation of the law schools' curricula, in violation of institutional academic freedom on 
what to teach
, particularly:
Sections 3 and 4 of LEBMO No. 2-2013;
Sections 33(6), 53, 54, 55 and 58 of LEBMO No. 1-2011;
LEBMO No. 5-2016; and 
LEBMO No. 14-2018.
The act and practice of the Legal Education Board of dictating the manner by which legal education institutions and law school professors conduct the teaching of law courses, in violation of institutional and individual academic freedom on 
how to teach
, particularly:
Sections 18(a), 18(c) 18(d), 20, 41.2, 58 and 59 of LEBMO No. 1-2011;
Sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 22, 24, 25, 26 and 27 of LEBMO No. 2-2013; and 
LEBMO No. 10-2017.
Other issuances of the Legal Education Board which are arbitrary, unreasonable, or issued 
ultra vires
, 
i.e.
:
Sections 20, 21, 24, 33.1, 34, 37, 43 of LEBMO No. 1-2011;
LEBMO No. 23-2019; 
LEBMO No. 16-2018; 
LEBMO No. 18-2018;
LEB Resolution No. 7-2010;
LEB Resolution No. 16-2011;
LEBMC No. 2-2017;
LEBMC No. 4-2017; and
LEBMC No. 6-2017.
[1]
 AN ACT PROVIDING FOR REFORMS IN LEGAL EDUCATION, CREATING FOR THE PURPOSE A LEGAL EDUCATION BOARD, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
[2]
 R.A. 7662, Sec. 7, par. (g).
[3]
 Id. at par. (h).
[4]
 Advisory, p. 3.
[5]
 391 Phil. 84 (2000). 
[6]
 Id. at 107-108.
[7]
 
Miriam College Foundation, Inc. v. Court of Appeals
, 401 Phil. 431, 455-456 (2000).
[8]
 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
, 160-A Phil. 929, 944 (1975).
[9]
 Art. XV, Sec. 8, par. (1).
[10]
 IV RECORD, CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION 56-57.
[11]
 IV RECORD, CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION 441.
[12]
 RULES OF COURT, Rule 129, Sec. 1: "
Judicial notice, when mandatory
. - 
A court shall take judicial notice, without the introduction of evidence
, of the existence and territorial extent of states, their political history, forms of government and symbols of nationality, the law of nations, the admiralty and maritime courts of the world and their seals, the political constitution and history of the Philippines, 
the official acts of the legislative, executive and judicial departments of the Philippines
, the laws of nature, the measure of time, and the geographical divisions." (Underscoring supplied)
[13]
 
Amicus Brief
, p. 6.
[14]
 CONSTITUTION, (1987), Art. XIV, Sec. 5, par. (2).
[15]
 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
, supra note 8.
[16]
 Id.
[17]
 Id. at 943.
[18]
 LEB Memorandum Order No. 1, Series of 2011 (LEBMO No. 1-2011), 
Section 31.1.
 A 
PERMIT
 entitles a law school to open and to offer the subjects of the first year of the law curriculum. A permit must be obtained before each academic year to enable the law school to operate on the succeeding academic year.
[19]
 Id. at Sec. 33.1, par. (4). 
See
 also Section 20 of the same LEBMO, which states that "The law school shall be headed by a properly qualified dean, maintain a corps of professors drawn from the ranks of leading and acknowledged practitioners as well as academics and legal scholars or experts in juridical science, properly equipped with the necessities of legal education, particularly library facilities including reliable internet access as well as suitable classrooms and a Moot Court room. There shall likewise be provided a faculty lounge for the convenience of members of the faculty."
[20]
 Id. at par. (5); underscoring supplied.
[21]
 Id. at par. (7); underscoring supplied.
[22]
 Id. at par. (8); underscoring supplied.
[23]
 Id. at Sec. 34.
[24]
 Id. at par. (d); underscoring supplied.
[25]
 Id. at Sec. 35, par. (3).
[26]
 Id. at Sec. 31.2. "A 
RECOGNITION
 constitutes full mandatory accreditation. It allows the law school to graduate its students, to confer upon them their degrees and titles and to endorse them to the Office of the Bar Confidant for the Bar Examinations."
[27]
 Id. at Sec. 35, par. (1).
[28]
 Id. at Sec. 37.
[29]
 Sec. 31, par. (2), which defines that "[a]s indicated, among others, by the fact that most of the members are neophytes in the teaching of law or their ratings in the students' and deans' evaluations are below 75% or its equivalent in other scoring system;" underscoring supplied.
[30]
 Id.
[31]
 Id.
[32]
 Id.
[33]
 Id.
[34]
 Id. at par. (1).
[35]
 Id.
[36]
 Sec. 8.
[37]
 Batas Pambansa Blg. 129 (1983), provides:
SEC. 15. 
Qualifications
. - No persons shall be appointed Regional Trial Judge unless he is a natural-born citizen of the Philippines, at least thirty-five years of age, and, 
for at least ten years has been engaged in the practice of law in the Philippines
 or has held a public office in the Philippines requiring admission to the practice of law as an indispensable requisite.
x x x x
SEC. 26. 
Qualifications
. - No person shall be appointed judge of a Metropolitan Trial Court, Municipal Trial Court, or Municipal Circuit Trial Court unless he is a natural-Â­born citizen of the Philippines, at least 30 years of age, and, 
for at least five years, has been engaged in the practice of law in the Philippines
, or has held a public office in the Philippines requiring admission to the practice of law as an indispensable requisite. (Underscoring supplied)
[38]
 
Amicus Brief
, p. 7.
[39]
 TSN, March 5, 2019, pp. 102-103.
[40]
 Id. at 173-175.
[41]
 LEBMO No. 2-2013, Sec. 33-35. See also LEB Memorandum Circular No. 14, Series of 2018 (LEBMC No. 14-2018).
[42]
 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
, supra note 8.
[43]
 
Cudia v. The Superintendent of the Philippine Military Academy
, 754 Phil. 590, 655 (2015).
[44]
 R.A. 7662, Sec. 7, par. (f).
[45]
 Sec. 33, par (6) and 53.
[46]
 Id. at Sec. 54.
[47]
 Id. at Sec. 55.
[48]
 Id. at Sec. 58.
[49]
 Sec. 3.
[50]
 LEBMO No. 1-2011, Sec. 55.2.
[51]
 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
, supra note 8.
[52]
 LEBMO No. 1-2011, Sec. 58.1 and 58.2, Second Year, First Semester, 2-unit subject, described as "A study of Presidential Decree No. 27, the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program and related laws and regulations, and the Special Security Act and the. Government Service Insurance Act."
[53]
 Id. at Sec. 58.2, Second Year, Second Semester, 2-unit subject described as "This is an elective subject that allows for more concentrated study on any of the following possible areas of international law: a. International Criminal Law: that should be taken with reference to R.A. 9851; b. The Law of the Sea: which should be of special interest to the Philippines because we are an archipelagic state; and c. International Trade Law: particularly the regime of the World Trade Organization."
[54]
 Id. at Sec. 58, Second Year, Second Semester, 2-unit subject described as "Study focused on the aspects of protecting, defending and seeking redress for violations of human rights in the Philippines."
[55]
 Id.
[56]
 Id.
[57]
 Par. (3).
[58]
 Id. at par. (7).
[59]
 LEB Memorandum Order No. 5, Series of 2016 (LEBMO No. 5-2016), par. (4).
[60]
 Id. at par. (1).
[61]
 Id.
[62]
 Id.
[63]
 Id.
[64]
 Id.
[65]
 
Amicus Brief
, p. 7.
[66]
 TSN, March 5, 2019, pp. 106-107.
[67]
 R.A. 7722, Sec. 13.
[68]
 Id.
[69]
 POLICIES, STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES FOR BACHELOR IN JOURNALISM (B JOURNALISM) AND BACHELOR OF ARTS IN JOURNALISM (BA JOURNALISM) PROGRAMS, May 12, 2017.
[70]
 POLICIES, STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES FOR THE BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN COMPUTER ENGINEERING (BSCPE) EFFECTIVE (AY) 2018-2019, CHED Memorandum Order No. 087-17, December 4, 2017.
[71]
 POLICIES AND STANDARDS FOR THE BACHELOR OF ARTS IN POLITICAL SCIENCE (BA POS) PROGRAM, CHED Memorandum Order No. 051-17, May 31, 2017.
[72]
 REVISED POLICIES, STANDARDS, AND GUIDELINES (PSGS) FOR BACHELOR OF ARTS IN COMMUNICATION (BA COMM) PROGRAM, CHED Memorandum Order No. 035-17, May 11, 2017.
[73]
 REVISED POLICIES, STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES FOR BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION, CHED Memorandum Order No. 017-17, May 9, 2017.
[74]
 POLICIES, STANDARDS, AND GUIDELINES FOR THE BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN STATISTICS (BS STAT) PROGRAM, CHED Memorandum Order No. 042-17, May 17, 2017.
[75]
 POLICIES, STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES FOR BACHELOR OF SECONDARY EDUCATION (BSED), CHED Memorandum Order No. 075-17, November 2, 2017.
[76]
 IV RECORD, CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION 77 (August 29, 1986).
[77]
 LEBMO No. 2-2013, Sec. 7-11,
[78]
 
Section 7. School Records of a Student.
 The school record of every student shall contain the final rating in each subject with the corresponding credits, and the action thereon preferably indicated by "passed" or "failed". No final record may contain any suspensive mark such as "Inc.". The student must either be given a passing or a failing grade in the final record.
[79]
 Sec. 24.
[80]
 Id. at Sec. 15.
[81]
 Id. at Sec. 25.
[82]
 Id. at Sec. 26.
[83]
 Id. at Sec. 27.
[84]
 Id. at Sec. 20, par. (a).
[85]
 Id. at Sec. 20, par. (b)(1).
[86]
 Id. at Sec. 20, par. (b)(2).
[87]
 Id. at Sec. 20, par. (b)(3).
[88]
 Id. at Sec. 20, par. (b)(4).
[89]
 
Miriam College Foundation, Inc. v. Court of Appeals
, supra note 7.
[90]
 
Cudia v. The Superintendent of the Philippine Military Academy
, supra note 43, at 655-656.
[91]
 Id. at 657-658, citing 
University of the Phils. Board of Regents v. Court of Appeals
, 372 Phil. 287, 306-308 (1999).
[92]
 Sec. 15.
[93]
 R.A. 7662, Sec. 7, par. (d).
[94]
 Id. at par. (c).
[95]
 Id. at Sec. 8.
[96]
 Id. at Sec. 9.
[97]
 Sec. 30.
[98]
 Id.
[99]
 Id.
[100]
 Id. at Sec. 31.
[101]
 Id. at Sec. 31.1.
 
[102]
 Id. at Sec. 31.2.
 
[103]
 Id. at Sec. 20. 
 
[104]
 Id.
[105]
 Id.
[106]
 Id.
[107]
 Id. at Sec. 24. 
In LEB Memorandum Order No. 23, Series of 2019 (LEBMO No. 23-2019), the LEB saw fit, under pain of administrative sanctions, to regulate the establishment of Law Journals, including the composition, position, and powers of the Editorial Board, the frequency of publication, and even a Law Journal's format and style.
[108]
 Id. at Sec. 33.1.
[109]
 Id. at Sec. 21.
[110]
 Id. at Sec. 34, par. (d).
[111]
 Id.
[112]
 Id. at Sec. 37.
[113]
 Id. at Sec. 43.
[114]
 
Lupangco v. Court of Appeals
, 243 Phil. 993, 1005 (1988).
[115]
 
Ponencia
, p. 102.
[116]
 
Amicus Brief
, p. 4.
[117]
 
Ponencia
, pp. 101-103.
CONCURRING OPINION 
REYES, A., JR., J.:
The question in the instant case is simple - may the State, under the guise of improving the quality of legal education forbid its own citizens from pursuing a course in law?
In the instant consolidated Petitions for Prohibition, and 
Certiorari
 and Prohibition, under Rule 65 of the Rules of Court, the petitioners seek to declare as unconstitutional RA No. 7662, or the Legal Education Reform Act of 1993. They principally target Legal Education Board Memorandum Order No. 7, Series of 2016 ("LEBMO NO. 7"), which established the Philippine Law School Admission Test ("PhilSAT"), and the subsequent Legal Education Board Memorandum Orders and Circulars issued in relation thereto, particularly Legal Education Board Memorandum Order No. 11, Series of 2017 ("LEBMO No. 11") which supplies transitional provisions for LEBMO No. 7 and Legal Education Board Memorandum Circular No. 18 ("LEBMC No. 18"), which enumerates the PhilSAT eligibility requirements for freshmen law students for academic year 2018-2019.
[1]
The 
ponencia
 focused its scrutiny on LEBMO No. 7, Series of 2016, LEBMO No. 11, Series of 2017, and LEBMO No. 18, which were all declared to be unconstitutional. This examination was based on the assumption that the objection against the PhilSAT lies at the core of all the Petitions.
[2]
I agree with the 
ponencia
 in striking as unconstitutional LEBMO No. 7, and all its adjunct orders.
 I further concede that they must be struck down on the basis of police power, and for being violative of the institutions' and students' academic freedom. In addition, I wish to highlight certain important matters that were not mentioned in the 
ponencia
.
            
The Importance of Education in the Philippine Setting
 
Education is a continuing concern that is impressed with public interest. The importance of education in our country is apparent from the numerous Constitutional provisions highlighting the obligation of the State to nurture and protect our educational systems, 
viz
.:
"
ARTICLE II. DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES AND STATE POLICIES PRINCIPLES
Article II, Section 17. The State shall give priority to education, science and technology, arts, culture, and sports to foster patriotism and nationalism, accelerate social progress, and promote total human liberation and development.
ARTICLE XIV. EDUCATION
Article XIV, Section 1. The State shall protect and promote the right of all citizens to quality education at all levels, and shall take appropriate steps to make such education accessible to all.
Article XIV, Section 2. The State shall:
1. Establish, maintain, and support a complete, adequate, and integrated system of education relevant to the needs of the people and society;
2. Establish and maintain, a system of free public education in the elementary and high school levels. Without limiting the natural rights of parents to rear their children, elementary education is compulsory for all children of school age;
3. Establish and maintain a system of scholarship grants, student loan programs, subsidies, and other incentives which shall be available to deserving students in both public and private schools, especially to the underprivileged;
4. Encourage non-formal, informal, and indigenous learning systems, as well as self-learning, independent, and out-of-school study programs particularly those that respond to community needs; and
5. Provide adult citizens, the disabled, and out-of-school youth with training in civics, vocational efficiency, and other skills.
Article XIV, Section 4
. The State recognizes the complementary roles of public and private institutions in the educational system and shall exercise reasonable supervision and regulation of all educational institutions."
The common thread that runs through these Constitutional provisions is the State's priority towards education. This stems from the reality that "education and total human development [are] the gateway not only to intellectual and moral development but also to economic advancement and the cultivation of the yearning for freedom and justice."
[3]
 It leads to the promotion of "total human liberation and development."
[4]
In view of the importance of education, the State is bound to protect and promote the right of all citizens to quality education, and to undertake steps to make it accessible and affordable for all.
[5]
 Added to this, all systems of education must be relevant to the needs of the people and the society.
[6]
Pursuant thereto, on December 23, 1999, Congress passed Republic Act No. 7662 or the Legal Education Reform Act of 1993. The law was created to fulfill the State's policy to uplift the standards of legal education to prepare law students for advocacy, counseling, problem solving, and decision-making; to infuse in them the ethics of the legal profession and impress on them the importance and dignity of the legal profession as an equal and indispensable partner of the Bench.
[7]
 To achieve these ends, the lawmakers created a Legal Education Board ("LEB"), to pursue the following objectives, to wit:
(a) to administer the legal education system in the country in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Act;
(b) to supervise the law schools in the country, consistent with its powers and functions as herein enumerated;
(c) to set the standards of accreditation for law schools taking into account, among others, the size of enrollment, the qualifications of the members of the faculty, the library and other facilities, without encroaching upon the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning;
(d) to accredit law schools that meet the standards of accreditation;
(e) to prescribe minimum standards for law admission and minimum qualifications and compensation of faculty members;
(f) to prescribe the basic curricula for the course of study aligned to the requirements for admission to the Bar, law practice and social consciousness, and such other courses of study as may be prescribed by the law schools and colleges under the different levels of accreditation status;
(g) to establish a law practice internship as a requirement for taking the Bar which a law student shall undergo with any duly accredited private or public law office or firm or legal assistance group anytime during the law course for a specific period that the Board may decide, but not to exceed a total of twelve (12) months. For this purpose, the Board shall prescribe the necessary guidelines for such accreditation and the specifications of such internship which shall include the actual work of a new member of the Bar.
(h) to adopt a system of continuing legal education. For this purpose, the Board may provide for the mandatory attendance of practicing lawyers in such courses and for such duration as the Board may deem necessary; and
(i) to perform such other functions and prescribe such rules and regulations necessary for the attainment of the policies and objectives of this Act. (Emphasis supplied)
Latching on to its power to prescribe the minimum standards for law admission, on December 29, 2016, the LEB released LEBMO No. 7, Series of 2016, which provides for the implementation of a nationwide uniform law school admission test - the PhilSAT. It is an aptitude exam that is designed to "measure the academic potential of the examinee to pursue the study of law," through a series of questions that gauge his/her proficiencies in communications, language, critical thinking, and verbal and quantitative reasoning.
[8]
Under LEBMO No. 7, the PhilSAT shall be administered once a year on or before April 16 in Metro Manila, Baguio City, Legazpi City, Cebu City, Iloilo City, Davao City, and Cagayan de Oro City. A prospective test taker must pay a testing fee of Php 1,500.00 (later reduced to Php 1,000).
[9]
Basically, the PhilSAT intends to predict the capacity of the test taker to survive in a challenging legal education program. It is surmised that if the examinee obtains a grade of 55 and above, then he/she can surely endure the rigors of law school.
In addition, it is assumed that those who graduated with honors and have been granted a professional civil service eligibility possess the basic competencies to thrive in law school. As such, they are exempt from the requirement of taking the PhilSAT, provided that they enroll in a law school within two years from their college graduation, and obtain a Certificate of Exemption from the LEB.
On the part of the law schools, they are strictly enjoined from admitting an applicant who failed to obtain the minimum required score, or an honor graduate who neglected to submit the Certificate of Exemption. Any law school who violates this rule shall be subjected to administrative sanctions, ranging from the termination or phasing-out of its law program; provisional cancellation of its government recognition and placing of its law program under Permit Status, and/or paying a fine of not less than Php 10,000.00.
[10]
Meanwhile, the LEB issued LEBMO No. 11, which provided for transitional provisions to LEBMO No. 7, allowing conditional admission and enrollment to those who failed to take the PhilSAT last April 16, 2017. The test takers' conditional enrollment was premised on an undertaking that they will take the next scheduled PhilSAT, and obtain the required minimum score, otherwise, their conditional admission shall be revoked. In addition, they must file a notarized application with the Chairman of the LEB, and pay an application fee of Php 300.00.
Thereafter, on June 8, 2018, LEB Chairperson Aquende issued LEBMC No. 18, putting an end to the conditional admission of students who failed to present a Certificate of Eligibility.
For sure, the LEB was properly vested with the power to prescribe minimum standards for law admission. However, this right is not unbridled, and is limited by the Constitutional admonition that said right must be exercised in a reasonable manner.
[11]
 This means that the extent of State supervision and regulation may not transgress the cherished freedoms granted under the Constitution.
            
The PhilSAT is Violative of the Law Schools' Academic Freedom
 
Inasmuch as the State possesses the right to supervise and regulate educational institutions, the Constitution craftily ensures that the exercise thereof will not spiral into tyranny. To avoid any form of despotism in the regulation of institutions, the Constitution adds a layer of protection in favor of the academic institutions by ensuring that notwithstanding the possibility of state interference in their affairs, "[a]cademic freedom shall be enjoyed in all institutions of higher learning."
[12]
 Law schools, as institutions of higher education, are the recipients of this boon.
[13]
This institutional autonomy granted unto universities has been in existence as early as the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions.
[14]
 Despite being strongly entrenched in our fundamental law, surprisingly, the body of jurisprudence on the matter of academic freedom is scarce. Noted Constitutionalist Fr. Joaquin G. Bernas, SJ theorizes that the scarcity stems from either a positive aspect - where occasions for litigation and controversy surrounding the matter are rare due to the unhampered freedom enjoyed by the academic world, or, in a negative aspect - due to a general ignorance or naivety regarding its meaning, purpose, and utility.
[15]
 The instant case is one of the rare occasions where the issue of academic freedom comes to fore, and thus, presents an opportunity for the Court to further elucidate its meaning.
Interestingly, academic freedom is an amorphous concept that eludes exact definition. The framers of the Constitution intended it to remain as expansive and dynamic, in a desire to give the courts a wide latitude to develop its meaning further, 
viz
.:
In anticipation of the question as to whether and what aspects of academic freedom are included herein, ConCom Commissioner Adolfo S. Azcuna explained: "Since academic freedom is a dynamic concept, we want to expand the frontiers of freedom, especially in education, therefore, we shall leave it to the courts to develop further the parameters of academic freedom."
More to the point, Commissioner Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon asked: "When we speak of the sentence 'academic freedom shall be enjoyed in all institutions of higher learning,' do we mean that academic freedom shall be enjoyed by the institution itself?" Azcuna replied: "Not only that, it also includes . . . ." Gascon finished off the broken thought, Â­ "the faculty and the students." Azcuna replied: "Yes."
[16]
In Philippine jurisprudence, one of the earliest definitions of this term emerged from the case of 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
 where the Court held that "the internal conditions for academic freedom in a university are that the academic staff should have de facto control of the following functions: (i) admission and examination of students; (ii) the curricula for courses of study; (iii) the appointment and tenure of office of academic staff and (iv) the allocation of income among the different categories of expenditure."
[17]
In the cases that followed, the parameters of academic freedom were simplified to pertain to a general liberty to decide (i) who may teach; (ii) who may be taught; (iii) how lessons shall be taught; and (iv) who may be admitted to study.
[18]
 Certainly, "[i]t is the business of a university to provide that atmosphere which is most conducive to speculation, experiment and creation; x x x an atmosphere in which there prevail the 'four essential freedoms' of a university."
[19]
Accordingly, insofar as the academic institution is concerned, it possesses the general right to determine not only the subject matter, or manner of teaching, but likewise has a free reign to select its own students. This liberty was described in 
Garcia
[20]
 as "a wide sphere of autonomy."
[21]
 Thus, the school has the .right to decide its admission criteria for itself, in accordance with "its aims and objectives, and how best to attain them - free from outside coercion or interference save possibly when the overriding public welfare calls for some restraint".
[22]
 Moreover, the Court nips in the bud any attempts to curtail or limit this freedom, warning that "[t]his constitutional provision [academic freedom] is not to be construed in a niggardly manner or in a grudging fashion. That would be to frustrate its purposes and nullify its intent."
[23]
Similarly, in 
Ateneo de Manila University v. Judge Capulong
,
[24]
 the Court went further by characterizing the right of the schools to choose their own students as "inherent," explaining that,
"educational institutions of higher learning are 
inherently
 endowed with the right to establish their policies, academic and otherwise, unhampered by external controls or pressure. In the Frankfurter formulation, this is articulated in the areas of: (1) what shall be taught, e.g., the curriculum and (2) who may be admitted to study."
[25]
Indeed, institutions of higher learning are inherently endowed with the right to establish their own policies - academic and otherwise, unhampered by external controls or pressure. This includes the creation of their own distinct policies, standards or criteria in the selection of their students, in accordance with their vision-mission and objectives. Remarkably, this prerogative is essential to their very functioning and identity. For sure, the schools' body politic serves as a representation of their standards, an embodiment of their vision, and a reflection of their ideals.
Equally important, in 
University of San Agustin, Inc. v. Court of Appeals
,
[26]
 the Court stressed that concomitant to the right of the schools to pursue their academic freedom, are the duties to ensure that this freedom is not jeopardized,
[27]
 and to staunchly avert any possible encroachments thereto. They must zealously guard their liberty against the State. Correlatively, on the part of the State, it should only interfere in instances where the public welfare necessitates its intrusion.
This idea was likewise evinced by the framers of the 1987 Constitution, 
viz
.:
MR. GASCON: When we speak of state regulation and supervision, that does not mean dictation, because we have already defined what education is. Hence, in the pursuit of knowledge in schools we should provide the educational institution as much academic freedom it needs. When we speak of regulation, we speak of guidelines and others. We do not believe that the State has any right to impose its ideas on the educational institution because that would already be a violation of their constitutional rights.
There is no conflict between our perspectives. When we speak of regulations, we speak of providing guidelines and cooperation in as far as defining curricular et cetera, but that does not give any mandate to the State to impose its ideas Â·on the educational institution. That is what academic freedom is all about.
[28]
In fact, even the legislative and executive branches of government protect this liberty. Particularly, under 
Batas Pambansa
 (B.P.) Blg. 232, as amended, the State affirms the objective of establishing and maintaining a complete, adequate and integrated system of education relevant to the goals of national development.
[29]
 Further, Section 13(2) of B.P. Blg. 232 recognizes that to achieve this goal, the determination of admission standards should be left to the schools, and not to the State, 
viz
.:
Sec. 13. Rights of Schools.
 - In addition to their rights provided for by law, school shall enjoy the following:
1. The right of their governing boards or lawful authorities to provide for the proper governance of the school and to adopt and enforce administrative or management systems.
2. The right for institutions of higher learning to determine on academic grounds 
who shall be admitted to study
, who may teach, and what shall be the subjects of the study and research. (Emphasis supplied)
Of course, this is not to relegate the State to being an impotent commander or a mere passive guardian. The State may set minimum admission requirements, provided that these are reasonable and equitable in their application, both for the school and the applicant.
[30]
 Said standards must never transgress upon Constitutional rights.
Judged against these parameters, it becomes all too apparent that LEBMO No. 7, insofar as it imposes the PhilSAT, is a constricting regulation that binds the hands of the schools from choosing who to admit in their law program. The LEB thrusts upon the law schools a pre-selected roster of applicants, and effectively deprives them of the right to select their own students on the basis of factors and criteria of their own choosing. Consequently, the law schools are left with no choice but to elect from this limited pool. Worse, they are forbidden from admitting those who failed to comply with the LEB's requirements, under pain of administrative sanctions.
Undoubtedly, the imposition of the PhilSAT is an oppressive and arbitrary measure. The LEB is bereft of power to substitute its own judgment for that of the universities. Rather, the universities should be free to consider other criteria (aside from the PhilSAT) in determining their prospective students' aptitude and ability to survive in law school. In fact, during the Oral Arguments held on March 5, 2019, amicus curiae Dean Sedfrey Candelaria revealed that passing the law entrance exam is not a guarantee that the student will survive through law school:
JUSTICE A. REYES:
All right. But then you would always state that it is not a guarantee that a student will pass law school because he passed the law entrance exam?
DEAN CANDELARIA:
I agree, Your Honor, in fact in my conversations with Father Bernas who has a longer stay with me in the law school, I think he has even said that any students catch up, let [sic] say, people who may have studied in other regions, they easily catch up once they go to Manila, at least in the Ateneo when he was Dean and I've observed this also during my tenure that there are people who have caught up with the rest come second year. . ."
[31]
Concededly, although the PhilSAT measures a person's aptitude or ability to cope with the rigors of law school, this is but a one-sided assessment. It fails to consider the person's diligence, drive or zeal - which are equally important in successfully obtaining a degree in law. Surely, one who may not be as proficient in language or reasoning, but is filled with a passion and a desire to learn, may perform as well as another who is innately intelligent, but who is apathetic and indifferent. There are certainly other extraneous factors, traits or characteristics that make a good student, which the law school must be allowed to consider, should it so desire.
            
The PhilSAT is Violative of the Students' Academic Freedom and Right to Acquire Knowledge
 
Article XIV, Section 5(3) of the 1987 Constitution declares that "[e]very citizen has a right to select a profession or course of study, subject to fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements."
Certainly, the right to pursue a course of higher learning is supported, no less by the State. It must endeavor to ensure a becoming respect for every citizen's right to select his/her course of study. To expand one's knowledge, to obtain a degree, or to advance one's professional growth are liberties guaranteed by the Constitution. Although these rights are not absolute, they may only be curbed by standards that are "fair, reasonable, and equitable."
[32]
Although the Constitution fails to specifically mention that academic freedom is equally enjoyed by students, this lacuna was supplied by the Court in 
Ateneo de Manila University v. Judge Capulong
,
[33]
 where for the first time, the Court affirmed that academic freedom is equally enjoyed by the students.
[34]
Interestingly, the modern concept of academic freedom as it applies to students has its immediate origin from a nineteenth century German term known as "lernfreiheit."
[35]
 This term meant that students were "'free to roam from place to place, sampling academic wares,' 'free to determine the choice and sequence of course,' 'responsible to no one for regular attendance,' and 'exempted from all tests save the final examinations.'"
[36]
 In a sense, it is an untrammeled freedom to satiate one's thirst for knowledge. Albeit a radical sense of freedom, in our jurisdiction, this so-called thirst may be curbed by reasonable standards.
Remarkably, the framers of the 1987 Constitution supported the idea of academic freedom as a "spirit of free inquiry,"
[37]
 which includes the pursuit of truth and advocacy.
[38]
 Moreover, they believed that academic freedom is essential to create an environment that will "encourage creative and critical thinking."
[39]
 In turn, this free flow of ideas will promote the full and wholistic development of the students. Also, more than the promotion of the students' welfare, the framers even went further by saying that this freedom of thought may even lead to the country's improvement - "so far as this [academic freedom] is allowed full play in the academic institutions or in the institutions of higher learning, I think we will end up the better as people."
[40]
Consequently, the framers stressed the need to protect this cherished freedom. They emphasized that the right to learn and discover, "should be protected as long as the activities fall within the canons of scholarship, and subjected as it were to the forces of the market place of ideas."
[41]
 They believed that if the State encourages critical and creative thinking, it will naturally protect it.
[42]
In addition, the law affirms the right of students to select their own course of study. This is evident from Section 9(2) of B.P. Blg. 232, otherwise known as the Education Act of 1982, as amended:
SEC. 9. Rights of Students in School.
 - In addition to other rights, and subject to the limitations prescribed by law and regulations, students and pupils in all schools shall enjoy the following rights:
1. The right to receive, primarily through competent instruction, relevant qualify education in line with national goals and conducive to their full development as person with human dignity.
2. 
The right to freely choose their field of study subject to existing curricula and to continue their course therein up to graduation, except in cases of academic deficiency, or violation of disciplinary regulations.
[43]
 (Emphasis supplied)
More so, as adverted to by the 
ponencia
, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirms that "[e]veryone has a right to education. Technical and professional education shall be made generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit."
[44]
Significantly, the Constitution, the law, and international conventions. are one in affirming the students' right to apply to a school of their own, choosing, and correspondingly, select their own course of study. Although said right of the students is subject to their compliance with the criteria dictated by the school, it must be stressed however that the student and the school are free to negotiate between themselves, without the interference of the State. This scenario should be likened to a free marketplace where the school showcases its product- its curricula, professors, environment, while a student, in turn, flaunts his/her own capabilities, skills, and talents. The parties should be left to freely decide for themselves whether they are a fit for each other. The State should not meddle, unless absolutely necessary for the public's safety and welfare. Should it decide to intervene, its power is in no way almighty, but must be circumscribed within the bounds of reasonableness.
            
The Right to Study law is an Adjunct of One's Fundamental Right to Acquire Knowledge. In the Same Vein, the Manner Through Which the Law School Decides to Teach the Law is an Exercise of its Freedom of Expression
 
This concept was broached during the deliberations for the 1973 Constitution. Delegate Vicente G. Sinco intimated that the freedom of the teacher and of the student may be anchored on the basic Constitutional guarantees of freedom, in addition to the specific guarantee of academic freedom:
[45]
by expressly guaranteeing academic freedom the new provision implicitly distinguishes academic freedom from a citizen's political right of free expression. Litigation on this new freedom, therefore will force the courts to search for standards of adjudication, standards not necessarily identical with those that have already been established for the general freedom of expression. 
Academic freedom is freedom not just in the context of a political freedom but also in the context of a narrower academic community.
 The implication of this distinction must be explored. The search for standards for academic freedom must take into consideration not just the general theory of freedom of expression but also the functions of a university.
[46]
More so, beyond the Philippine laws and Constitution, the right to knowledge is a universal human right, protected no less by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ("ICPR").
Specifically, Article 19 of the ICPR, affirms that:
Article 19
1. Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference.
2. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice.
3. The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries with it special duties and responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but these shall only be such as are provided by law and are necessary:
(a) For respect of the rights or reputations of others;
(b) For the protection of national security or of public order (order public), or of public health or morals.
[47]
Indeed, freedom of expression, which includes the right to receive information and ideas of all kinds, is a civil and political right. It is an inalienable right that stems from a person's inherent dignity. It is likewise the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world.
[48]
 As such, this essential guarantee may only be restricted insofar as it violates the rights and reputation of others, or if absolutely necessary to protect national security and public order.
[49]
Moreover, knowledge cannot be passed without a medium. Thus, the right of the law school to teach, the information it shares, and its manner of teaching are representations of its freedom of expression. The State should only step in, should it find that "the means or methods of instruction are clearly found to be inefficient, impractical, or riddled with corruption."
[50]
Furthermore, I wish to underscore that a distinction exists between the right to study law and the privilege to practice it. Although these two activities may be related, they are not one and the same. The study of law does not 
ipso facto
 lead to the practice thereof. This was a point that I stressed during the Oral Arguments on March 5, 2019:
"
JUSTICE A. REYES:
 But you are not in the pursuit of the study of law not in the pursuit of being a lawyer. Is there a need for an entrance exam if he just wants to study the law itself as a person?
x x x x
He doesn't want to become a lawyer, he just wants to be a student of the law. He has a lot of time on his hands, he has all the money. He just wants to study law, is there anything wrong with that?"
[51]
Lest it be forgotten, the law is not only a profession, but it is first and foremost, a field of study. It is an interesting and practical science, that proves useful for everyday life, and for one's personal growth and career. For instance, the Law on Obligations and Contracts is practical for one engaged in business; Constitutional Law piques the interest of one desirous to learn about the workings of the government and the citizen's fundamental rights; and Criminal Law, inflames one curious about society's penal laws and systems. For others, obtaining a Bachelor's Degree or a Juris Doctor in Law serves as a gateway to promotion. These are but a few examples of a myriad of realities pertaining to the law's importance as an academic field.
Certainly, the State has no legitimate interest in preventing such individuals who want to learn about the law, who have free time on their hands, and who possess resources to fund a legal education. Neither does it have the right to prevent a law school that is willing and capable of teaching such persons from admitting them in their program.
[52]
This concern was likewise echoed by the eminent magistrate, Justice Antonio T. Carpio, when he said:
Preventing anyone from going to law school who can afford to go to school pay for his own tuition fees, that's unreasonable. Even if he scores only one percent (1%), if the school is willing to accept him, he is willing to pay, you cannot stop him.
[53]
Also, as eloquently articulated by Justice Marvic M.V.F. Leonen,
Considering, Chair, that this affects a freedom and a primordial freedom at that, freedom of expression, academic freedom, the way we teach our, as Justice Andy Reyes pointed out, the way we teach law to our citizens and therefore, to me, the level of scrutiny should not be cursory. The level of scrutiny must be deep and I would think it would apply strict scrutiny in this regard. Therefore, if there was no study that supported it, then perhaps, it may be stricken down as unreasonable, and therefore, grave abuse of discretion. x x x
[54]
It is therefore apparent that an individual's right to knowledge and the manner by which such knowledge is pursued, are entitled to a high degree of protection by the State and its agencies. Our State is in no way autocratic. It is not repressive, and should not prevent its citizens from gaining knowledge that will promote their personal growth.
[55]
 These are simple realities that cannot be ignored. To deprive a person of his right to knowledge, which is an adjunct of one's freedom of expression, may not be done under flimsy and vague pretexts. This Constitutional protection to freedom of expression enjoys an exalted place in the spectrum of rights, and is certainly entitled to the highest level of scrutiny.
            
A Legitimate Objective Will not in Itself Justify State Intrusion if the Means Employed Pursuant Thereto are Unreasonable and Oppressive
 
There is no doubt that the ultimate goal of attaining quality legal education is a legitimate and lofty objective. For sure, no country would negligently allow degenerate institutions that fail to properly educate students to persist to the detriment of the community. However, the issue is not as simple. It must be noted that the test for a valid exercise of police power is two-pronged. The presence of a legitimate State objective must be balanced alongside a reasonable means for achieving such goal One cannot exist without the other.
Remarkably, in 
Lupangco v. Court of Appeals
,
[56]
 the Court struck down the regulation issued by the Professional Regulatory Commission which prohibited those taking the accountancy licensure examinations from attending review classes, conferences and receiving hand-outs, review materials, or tips three days immediately preceeding the examination day. The Court stressed that although the measure was backed by a noble objective, this will not serve as a justification to violate constitutional freedoms, to wit:
Of course, We realize that the questioned resolution was adopted for a commendable purpose which is "to preserve the integrity and purity of the licensure examinations." However, its good aim cannot be a cloak to conceal its constitutional infirmities. On its face, it can be readily seen that it is unreasonable in that an examinee cannot even 
attend any review class, briefing, conference or the like, or receive any hand-out, review material, or any tip from any school, college or university, or any review center or the like or any reviewer, lecturer, instructor, official or employee of any of the aforementioned or similar institutions
."
[57]
 (Emphasis in the original)
Indeed, the level of supervision and regulation granted unto the State must be reasonable. This "reasonableness" in no way grants a warrant for the State to exercise oppressive control over the schools. In the case of the PhilSAT, in addition to being arbitrary and oppressive, the LEB likewise failed to establish that the means employed will serve its purpose of improving the quality of legal education.
In fact, during the oral arguments, Chairperson Aquende admitted that the LEB issuances imposing the PhilSAT were bereft of statistical basis.
[58]
 This presents an even greater challenge against the PhilSAT. It appears that the LEB merely operates on the hunch that the PhilSAT will improve the quality of legal education. Although I agree with the point made by Justice Alfredo Benjamin Caguioa that the schools (or the LEB) are not required to conduct statistical research regarding the effectiveness of the PhilSAT. This is only to underscore the absence of any factual basis proving the LEB's contention.
Worse, the PhilSAT renders nugatory the Constitutional provision mandating that education should be made accessible to all by limiting a legal degree to an elite few. Students who desire to obtain a degree in law are immediately barred from this pursuit, simply on their purported inanity, as determined by the PhilSAT. In effect, the State punishes the students instead of encouraging them to learn, thereby making the law a restrictive subject that is only available to an exclusive few who possess the required aptitude and wealth.
All told, this case is riddled with paradoxes. The LEB, in its desire to achieve quality legal education, bullheadedly pursued such end and trampled upon the right to accessible education. It must be stressed that quality education may not be accomplished by excluding a segment of the population from learning. Access to education should never be sacrificed to achieve this end. Rather, these two goals should go hand-in-hand. Barring the citizens from pursuing further studies and learning more about the law, lead to stripping them of their fundamental right to knowledge. There is nothing more stifling to our democracy than repressing our own citizens' pursuit for personal growth. For sure, there are other Constitutionally permissible ways of achieving this end.
As a final note, the law is personified by Lady Justice, whose eyes are covered with a blindfold as an assurance that she will always dispense justice objectively to her suitors, regardless of their wealth and power; her scales of justice are perfectly balanced, for she delicately weighs all circumstances before her; her sword is scathing, proving that her justice is swift and firm - this is the symbol of law and justice. Ironically, however, with the PhilSAT, entry to the study of law (a field that will train one to imbibe justice and fairness) is far from objective and just. In this oppressive scenario, Lady Justice's eyes are opened wide as she peremptorily judges prospective students, barring the inane from learning the law; her scales are tilted in favor of an elite few; and her sword is sharp and piercing against those who failed to reach her criteria. This is not the law, and it should never be. 
Thus, I vote to declare as unconstitutional LEBMO No. 7, and all its adjunct orders.
[1]
 Petition, p. 1148.
[2]
 Main Decision, p. 15.
[3]
 Deliberations for the 1987 Constitution, Volume IV, p. 170; Bernas, p. 91. 
[4]
 1987 CONSTITUTION, Article II, Sec. 17.
[5]
 1987 CONSTITUTION, Article XIV, Sec. 2(3).
[6]
 1987 CONSTITUTION, Article XIV, Sec. 2(1).
[7]
 REPUBLIC ACT No. 7662 - An Act Providing for Reforms in the Legal Education, Creating for the Purpose, A Legal Education Board and For Other Purposes.
[8]
 LEBMO No. 7.
[9]
 Id.
[10]
 LEBMO No. 7; LEBMO No. 2-2013, Section 32.
[11]
 1987 CONSTITUTION, Article XIV, Section 4(1).
[12]
 1987 CONSTITUTION, Article XIV, Section 5(2).
[13]
 
The PTA of St. Mathew Christian Academy, et al. v. The Metropolitan Bank and Trust Co.
, 627 Phil. 669, 683 (2010).
[14]
 
University of the Phils. Board of Regents v. Court of Appeals
, 372 Phil. 287, 306-307 (1999).
[15]
 Bernas, p. 1294.
[16]
 
Ateneo de Manila University v. Judge Capulong
, 294 Phil. 654, 674 (1993).
[17]
 160-A Phil. 929, 944 (1975).
[18]
 
Mercado, et al. v. AMA Computer College-ParaÃ±aque City, Inc.
, 632 Phil. 228, 251 (2010), citing 
Miriam College Foundation, Inc. v. Court of Appeals
, 401 Phil. 431, 455-456 (2000).
[19]
 
The PTA of St. Mathew Christian Academy, et al. v. The Metropolitan Bank and Trust Co
, supra note 13.
[20]
 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
, supra note 17.
[21]
 Id. at 943.
[22]
 Id.
[23]
 
University of San Agustin, Inc. v. Court of Appeals
, 300 Phil. 819, 833 (1994).
[24]
 
Ateneo de Manila University v. Judge Capulong
, supra note 16.
[25]
 Id. at 673.
[26]
 Supra note 23.
[27]
 Id. at 833 citing 
Licup, et al. v. University of San Carlos (USC), et al.
, 258-A Phil. 417, 423-424 (1989).
[28]
 Deliberations for the 1987 Constitution, Volume IV, p. 441.
[29]
 Batas Pambansa Blg. 232, Sec. 3. Declaration of Basic Policy.
[30]
 Bernas, p. 1306.
[31]
 Transcript of Oral Arguments held on March 5, 2019, p. 122.
[32]
 1987 CONSTITUTION, Article XIV, Section 5(3).
[33]
 Supra note 16.
[34]
 Id.
[35]
 Bernas, p. 1295.
[36]
 Id.
[37]
 Deliberations for the 1987 Constitution, Volume IV, p. 438.
[38]
 Id. at 439.
[39]
 Id. at 438.
[40]
 Id.
[41]
 Id.
[42]
 Id. at 439.
[43]
 
University of San Agustin, Inc. v. Court of Appeals
, supra note 23 at 832-833.
[44]
 Article 26, Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
[45]
 Bernas, pp. 1298-1299.
[46]
 Bernas, p. 1301.
[47]
 Article 19, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
[48]
 Preamble, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
[49]
 Article 12, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
[50]
 
Lupangco v. Court of Appeals
, 243 Phil. 993, 1006 (1988).
[51]
 Transcript of Oral Arguments, March 5, 2019, p. 123.
[52]
 Id.
[53]
 Transcript of Oral Arguments, March 5, 2019, p. 184.
[54]
 Transcript, Oral Arguments, March 5, 2019, p. 173.
[55]
 
Lupangco v. Court of Appeals
, supra note 50 at 1005.
[56]
 Id.
[57]
 Id. at 1004-1005.
[58]
 Transcript of Oral Arguments, March 5, 2019, p. 172.
SEPARATE CONCURRING AND DISSENTING OPINION
GESMUNDO, J.:
Before this Court are two consolidated petitions in G.R. No. 230642, it seeks to nullify Republic Act No. 7662 and abolish the Legal Education Board (
LEB
); and in G.R. No. 242954, to annul and set aside LEB Memorandum Order Nos. 7-2016 and 11-2017, dated December 29, 2016 and April 20, 2017, respectively, and LEB Memorandum Circular No. 18-2018, dated October 5, 2018.
I vote to partly grant the consolidated petitions.
There is a stereotype that the study of law is a precursor for the practice of law. However, the study of law is not that simple. There may be instances when a person studies law for its philosophy, wisdom, and concepts; and choose not to take the bar examinations as he or she is not interested in becoming a lawyer. Thus, the study of law does not always result into the practice of law. Nonetheless, even after hurdling the bar, lawyers and judges are still mandated to continue the study of law. It is a well-settled rule that the study of law is a never-ending and ceaseless process.
[1]
The study of the law is not an exact science with definite fields of black and white and unbending rules and rigid dogmas. The beauty of this discipline in the words of Justice Holmes, is the "penumbra shading gradually from one extreme to another," that gives rise to those honest differences of opinion among the brotherhood as to its correct interpretation. Honest differences are allowed and, indeed, inevitable, but we certainly must frown on stilted readings to suit one's motives, especially if they are less than noble. The law does not permit this, and much less, for that matter, does equity.
[2]
            
Academic Freedom of Institutions of Higher Learning
 
It is clear that the study of law is within the domain of academic freedom. In 
Ateneo de Manila University v. Judge Capulong
,
[3]
 the Court stated that the term "academic freedom", which has evolved to describe the emerging rights related to intellectual liberty, has traditionally been associated with freedom of thought, speech, expression and the press; in other words, it has been identified with the right of individuals in universities, such as professors, researchers and administrators, to investigate, pursue, discuss and, in the immortal words of Socrates, "to follow the argument wherever it may lead," free from internal and external interference or pressure. Obviously, its optimum impact is best realized where this freedom is exercised judiciously and does not degenerate into unbridled license. Early cases on this individual aspect of academic freedom have stressed the need for assuring to such individuals a measure of independence through the guarantees of autonomy and security of tenure.
[4]
Academic freedom has long been recognized by our organic laws. Section 5, Article XIV, of the 1935 Constitution states that universities established by the State shall enjoy academic freedom. Likewise, Section 8, Article XV, of the 1973 Constitution states that all institutions of higher learning shall enjoy academic freedom. Under the present Constitution, Section 5, Article XIV, states that academic freedom shall be enjoyed in all institutions of higher learning. Verily, institutions of higher learning, such as schools, colleges, and universities offering a degree program in law, all have constitutionally enshrined academic freedom.
Academic freedom of institutions of higher learning have the following essential freedoms: (1) who may teach; (2) what may be taught; (3) how it shall be taught; and (4) who may be admitted to study.
[5]
 This was first discussed in the Supreme Court of the United States (
SCOTUS
) case of 
Sweezy v. New Hampshire
.
[6]
 In that case, Paul Sweezy, who was an economist and lecturer in the University of New Hampshire, was subpoenaed by the State Attorney General to answer several questions, which included inquiries regarding his lectures on Socialism at the university. Paul Sweezy refused to answer particular questions and was declared in contempt of court. The SCOTUS reversed the contempt charge on the basis of violation of academic freedom and stated that:
The essentiality of freedom in the community of American universities is almost self-evident. No one should underestimate the vital role in a democracy that is played by those who guide and train our youth. To impose any strait jacket upon the intellectual leaders in our colleges and universities would imperil the future of our Nation. No field of education is so thoroughly comprehended by man that new discoveries cannot yet be made. Particularly is that true in the social sciences, where few, if any, principles are accepted as absolutes. Scholarship cannot flourish in an atmosphere of suspicion and distrust. Teachers and students must always remain free to inquire, to study and to evaluate, to gain new maturity and understanding; otherwise, our civilization will stagnate and die.
[7]
In the concurring opinion of Justice Frankfurter, he explained the importance of academic freedom in a university, 
viz
:
"In a university knowledge is its own end, not merely a means to an end. A university ceases to be true to its own nature if it becomes the tool of Church or State or any sectional interest. A university is characterized by the spirit of free inquiry, its ideal being the ideal of Socrates-'to follow the argument where it leads.' This implies the right to examine, question, modify or reject traditional ideas and beliefs. Dogma and hypothesis are incompatible, and the concept of an immutable doctrine is repugnant to the spirit of a university. The concern of its scholars is not merely to add and revise facts in relation to an accepted framework, but to be ever examining and modifying the framework itself.
. . . .
"Freedom to reason and freedom for disputation on the basis of observation and experiment are the necessary conditions for the advancement of scientific knowledge. A sense of freedom is also necessary for creative work in the arts which, equally with scientific research, is the concern of the university.
. . . .
". . . It is the business of a university to provide that atmosphere which is most conducive to speculation, experiment and creation. It is an atmosphere in which there prevail 'the four essential freedoms' of a university-
to determine for itself on academic grounds who may teach, what may be taught, how it shall be taught, and who may be admitted to study
."
[8]
 (emphasis supplied)
In the subsequent case of 
Keyishian v. Board of Regents
,
[9]
 the SCOTUS held that a law cannot force teachers to sign an oath stating they are not members of certain communist parties pursuant to their academic freedom and because the law is overbreadth, to wit:
Our Nation is deeply committed to safeguarding academic freedom, which is of transcendent value to all of us, and not merely to the teachers concerned. That freedom is therefore a special concern of the First Amendment, which does not tolerate laws that cast a pall of orthodoxy over the classroom. "The vigilant protection of constitutional freedoms is nowhere more vital than in the community of American schools." The classroom is peculiarly the "marketplace of ideas." The Nation's future depends upon leaders trained through wide exposure to that robust exchange of ideas which discovers truth "out of a multitude of tongues, [rather] than through any kind of authoritative selection."
On the other hand, in 
University of California Regents v. Bakke
,
[10]
 the SCOTUS tackled the legality of the university policy which requires a particular number of minorities for admission. It grounded its analysis on academic freedom and stated that "the university's use of race in its admission may use for the attainment of a diverse student body. Nothing less than the nation's future depends upon leaders trained through wide exposure to the ideas and mores of students as diverse as this United States. 
In seeking the right to select those students who will contribute the most to the 'robust exchange of ideas,' a university seeks to achieve a goal that is of paramount importance in the fulfillment of its mission.
 Both tradition and experience lend support to the view that the contribution of diversity is substantial."
[11]
 Nevertheless, while race may be considered as one of the several factors for admission, the SCOTUS ruled that the specific or fixed number of minorities for university admission is too unreasonable. The ruling in 
University of California Regents v. Bakke
 was affirmed in 
Grutter v. Bollinger
,
[12]
 regarding admission in the University of Michigan Law School, 
Gratz v. Bollinger
,
[13]
 regarding the point system admission policy of the University of Michigan, and 
Fisher v. University of Texas
.
[14]
            
Academic Freedom in Philippine Jurisdiction
 
The four essential freedoms constituting academic freedom have also been discussed by our jurisprudence. In 
University of the Phils. v. Civil Service Commission
,
[15]
 the Court discussed institutions of higher learning's freedom to determine "who may teach." In that case, a professor was on leave of absence without pay for four (4) years. Nevertheless, the university therein still accepted the professor back to work even though the Civil Service Commission had terminated his services. The Court ruled that the university has the academic freedom to determine who shall teach. This freedom encompasses the autonomy to choose who should teach and, concomitant therewith, who should be retained in its rolls of professors and other academic personnel.
[16]
 It was also stated therein that "since academic freedom is a dynamic concept, we want to expand the frontiers of freedom, especially in education, therefore, we shall leave it to the courts to develop further the parameters of academic freedom."
[17]
Jurisprudence has also recognized that institutions of higher learning have the enshrined freedom to determine "who may be admitted to study." In 
Garcia v. The Faculty Admission Committee, Loyola School of Theology
,
[18]
 it involved a student who wanted to compel the Loyola School of Theology to accept her in their Master of Arts in Theology program. The respondent therein invoked its academic freedom to admit students in its program. The Court denied the petition and held that the respondent indeed had the academic freedom to determine who would be admitted to their school. It was highlighted that colleges and universities should not be looked upon as public utilities devoid of any discretion as to whom to admit or reject Education, especially higher education, belongs to a different, and certainly higher category.
[19]
In 
Ateneo de Manila University v. Judge Capulong
,
[20]
 the law students involved in the hazing incident argued that the school imposed arbitrary rules and penalties regarding its admission policy. The Court held that the law school, which is an institute of higher learning, had the academic freedom to determine who may be admitted, including the power to promulgate rules concerning student discipline. The establishment of rules governing university-student relations, particularly those pertaining to student discipline, may be regarded as vital, not merely to the smooth and efficient operation of the institution, but to its very survival.
[21]
In 
Licup v. University of San Carlos
,
[22]
 the students involved committed demonstrations in the university that were far from peaceful and the school administration imposed the penalty of non-admission. The Court affirmed the penalty imposed by the school. While it is true that students are entitled to the right to pursue their education, the school is likewise entitled to academic freedom and has the concomitant right to see to it that this freedom is not jeopardized. The Court underscored that an institution of learning has a contractual obligation to afford its students a fair opportunity to complete the course they seek to pursue. However, when a student commits a serious breach of discipline or fails to maintain the required academic standard, he forfeits that contractual right; and the Court should not review the discretion of university authorities.
[23]
However, academic freedom of institutions of higher learning is not absolute; rather, it is subject to the limitation of reasonability and that it should not be arbitrarily exercised. In 
Isabelo, Jr. v. Perpetual Help College of Rizal, Inc.
,
[24]
 the student therein, who questioned the tuition fee hike of the school, was expelled because he allegedly had Citizen's Military Training (
CMT
) deficiencies. The Court held that the school cannot invoke academic freedom to immediately expel its student based on mere deficiencies in the CMT. The Court held that "[w]hile we ordinarily would not delve into the exercise of sound judgment, we will not, however, hesitate to act when we perceive taints of arbitrariness in the process. The punishment of expulsion appears to us rather disproportionate to his having had some unit deficiencies in his CMT course. Indeed, the DECS itself is conceding to the grant of the instant petition. The circumstances lend truth to the petitioner's claim that the private respondent has strongly been influenced by his active participation in questioning PHCR's application for tuition fee increase."
[25]
On the other hand, in 
Morales v. The Board of Regents of the University of the Phils.
,
[26]
 the Court emphasized that the discretion of schools of learning to formulate rules and guidelines in the granting of honors for purposes of graduation forms part of academic freedom. And such discretion may not be disturbed much less controlled by the courts, unless there is grave abuse of discretion in its exercise.
[27]
Based on the foregoing, it is clear that institutions of higher learning are granted academic freedom by the Constitution, which includes that freedom to determine who may be admitted to study. The academic freedom of these institutions, however, are not unbridled and subject to the test of reasonableness.
            
LEB Memorandum Orders and Circular unreasonably restrict academic freedom
 
 
LEB Memorandum Order No. 7-2016 instituted the PhilSAT, which is an aptitude test that measures the academic potential of an examinee. Only those who pass with a 55% score on the examination shall be allowed admission in law schools. LEB Memorandum Order No, 11-2017, states that those who failed the first PhilSAT may be conditionally admitted to law schools in the first semester of school year 2017 to 2018 provided they take the next scheduled PhilSAT. On the other hand, LEB Memorandum Circular No. 18-2018 discontinued the conditional admission of students. Thus, the LEB requires the mandatory taking of the PhilSAT before being admitted to any law school; and, a student shall not be admitted if he or she fails the said examination. In other words, PhilSAT is exclusionary and those that do not pass the said test shall not be admitted in the study of law. The respondents argue that LEB's institution of the PhilSAT is within the State's power to regulate all educational institutions.
I concur with the 
ponencia
 that the LEB Memorandum Orders and Circular, requiring the PhilSAT as mandatory and exclusionary, are unconstitutional.
Institutes of higher learning have academic freedom, under the Constitution, and this includes the freedom to determine who may be admitted to study. Such freedom may only be limited by the State based on the test of reasonability. In this case, however, the assailed LEB Memorandum Orders fail to provide a reasonable justification for restraining the admission of students to law schools based on the following reasons:
First
, by making the PhilSAT mandatory and exclusionary, the LEB significantly restricts the freedom of law schools to determine who shall be admitted as law students. Only those who pass the said examination shall be considered for admission to these institutions of higher learning. Consequently, the LEB, through the PhilSAT, first chooses the potential law students, and only afterwards, shall the law schools be allowed to choose their students from the limited pool of student-passers. The said institutes of higher learning are barred from considering those students who failed the examinations, regardless of their previous academic grades and achievements.
Second
, the LEB does not give any justification for the required passing score of 55% and the format of the examinations. The studies cited by the LEB were conducted by different organizations, for different professions, and for foreign jurisdictions. Indeed, no concrete study conducted in the Philippines for the legal profession was provided to substantiate the passing score and the test format. It is not even clear whether the consensus of the law schools in the country was secured before the LEB imposed the PhilSAT. Without any concrete basis for the conduct of the examination, it would be unreasonable to impose the same mandatorily and without exemption to the institutes of higher learning.
Third
, law schools are given no option other than to follow the LEB Memorandum Orders and Circular. Failure to comply with these shall result in administrative sanctions, ranging from closure of the law school, phase-out of the law program, provision cancellation of its recognition and/or liability to pay a fine of P10,000.00 for each infraction. Even without a valid reason, for the imposition of the PhilSAT requirement, the LEB completely restricts the law schools from accepting students who did not pass the said examination. The schools' exercise of academic freedom to choose their students is restricted by the threat of administrative and pecuniary sanctions.
Assuming 
arguendo
 that the LEB Memorandum Orders and Circular were issued under the exercise of police power of the State to regulate the rights of certain institutions, it does not justify the unreasonable restriction on the academic freedom of institutes of higher learning. Notwithstanding its extensive sweep, police power is not without its own limitations. For all its awesome consequences, it may not be exercised arbitrarily or unreasonably. Otherwise, and in that event, it defeats the purpose for which it is exercised, that is, to advance the public good. Thus, when the power is used to further private interests at the expense of the citizenry, there is a clear misuse of the power.
[28]
Here, the LEB failed to establish the reasonable means to limit the academic freedom of the institutes of higher learning. Again, there is no valid explanation provided on the mandatory and exclusionary requirement of the PhilSAT, its passing grade, and format of examinations. Manifestly, to impose a penalty on law schools based on an unreasonable policy that restricts academic freedom would be an invalid exercise of police power.
            
PhilSAT is different from the NMAT and LSAT
 
One of the arguments of the LEB is that the PhilSAT is comparable to the National Medical Admission Test (NMAT), which was upheld by the Court in 
Tablarin v. Judge Gutierrez
,
[29]
 and the Law School Admission Test (
LSAT
) in the United States.
I disagree.
There are too many differences between the PhilSAT and the NMAT that they cannot be treated in the same vein. One of the most notable differences is that in the NMAT, there is actually no passing or failing grade; rather, the examinees are merely given a percentile score. Medical schools have the discretion to determine the acceptable percentile score of their potential students. Thus, even with the NMAT, medical schools have full freedom and control of students they intend to admit. They have the sole discretion to impose the required percentile score in the NMAT, whether high or low, as a requirement for admission. In fact, some medical schools are even allowed to conditionally accept students who have not yet taken their NMAT.
Unlike the NMAT, the PhilSAT provides for a strict passing score of 55%. This passing score was provided by the LEB and not decided by the law schools themselves. These law schools have no option in adjusting the passing score and they can only accept students who pass the said test. Stated differently, law schools have no discretion to determine which students they will admit insofar as the PhilSAT requirement is concerned.
On the other hand, the LSAT is a nationwide admission. test for law Â· schools in the United States. The said test is administered by the Law School Admission Council (
LSAC
), which is a non-profit corporation comprised of more than 200 law schools in the United States and Canada. The institutes of higher learning themselves participate, prepare, and conduct the LSAT, and not their government.
[30]
 Nonetheless, even if there is the LSAT in the United States, the said examination is not an absolute requirement for law school admission. The American Bar Association Standards and Rules of Procedure merely require each student-applicant to take a valid and reliable admission test and it is not only confined to the LSAT.
[31]
 Thus, law schools in the United States are allowed to require other admission tests provided that these are valid and reliable. Indeed, the LSAT requirement in the United States does not unreasonably restrict the academic freedom of the law schools therein.
With the PhilSAT, however, the examination is mandatory and exclusionary, and local law schools have no discretion to choose a different admission test. The law schools are only confined to choosing those students who pass the PhilSAT, which does not provide any valid justification for restricting academic freedom.
Evidently, both the NMAT and the LSAT are different from the PhilSAT. The former respect and consider the academic freedom of institutes of higher learning in their liberty of choosing their students; while with the latter, law schools are unreasonably constrained in determining the students it may accept for enrollment.
            
Uniform Admission Examination instituted by Foreign Law Schools
 
I firmly believe that PhilSAT should be set aside; instead, the law schools in the Philippines, through the Philippine Association of Law Schools (
PALS
), and under the mere supervision of LEB, should establish a unified, standardized, and acceptable law admission examination.
 Said examination must be unrestrictive of academic freedom, cost-efficient, accessible, and an effective tool in assessing incoming law students. At the onset, I will discuss the constitutional viability of a unified law admission examination, spearheaded by the law schools, pursuant to their right to academic freedom.
There was a time when law schools could follow the advice of Wigmore, who believed that "the way to find out whether a boy [or girl] has the makings of a competent lawyer is to see what he [or she] can do in a first year of law studies."
[32]
 In those days there were enough spaces to admit every applicant who met minimal credentials, and they all could be given the opportunity to prove themselves in law school. But by the 1920's many law schools found that they could not admit all minimally qualified applicants, and a selection process began. The pressure to use some kind of admissions test mounted, and a number of schools instituted them.
[33]
In the United States, the LSAT was formulated by the LSAC. The idea of LSAT began on May 17, 1945, when Frank Bowles, Admission Director at Columbia Law School, wrote to the President of College Entrance Examination Board (
CEEB
) suggesting the creation of a law capacity test to be used in admission decisions. It was discussed that the validity of the LSAT would be linked to its correlation with grades in the first year of law study. Consequently, correlation with success in taking the bar examination was rejected because candidates often take the bar exam several times and everybody passes them sooner or later. It was also highlighted that the more law schools participating in the LSAT, the greater the numbers for testing validity and the more widely the costs would be spread.
[34]
On August 15, 1947, representatives of Columbia, Yale and Harvard law schools met with the representatives of the CEEB. The representative of Harvard opined, that the LSAT would help make decisions on "those borderline on college record and those from unknown colleges."
[35]
 
It was also agreed upon to invite more law schools to participate and that the creation of the test would also create a new organization of law schools.
 As of 2000, the LSAC now consists of a total 198 law schools.
[36]
On November 10, 1947, the initial LSAT was discussed and the law schools from Rutgers, Northwestern, Syracuse, Stanford, Cornell, the University of Southern California, New York University, the University of Pennsylvania, Yale, and Harvard also participated.
[37]
 
The founders of the test were adamant that it could not and must not be the only criterion for admission.
Further, the LSAT has played an important role in opening the legal profession at all levels to men and women whose ancestors had been the object of merciless prejudice and overt discrimination. This does not mean that the test is a foolproof gauge of merit. It is merely what it was designed to be a tool to aid in the admissions decision. It was not designed as a pass or fail grading system.
[38]
 The entire rationale for the test was the need to supplement the information supplied by the undergraduate record. The scores on the test were to be used along with pre[-]law grades, recommendations, and other information as an aid in admissions.
[39]
In his Dissenting Opinion in 
DeFunis v. Odegaard
,
[40]
 Justice Douglas of the SCOTUS opined that when the Law School Admission Committees consider the LSAT, undergraduate grades, and prior achievement of the, applicants, it does not violate the Equal Protection Clause, to wit:
The Equal Protection Clause did not enact a requirement that law schools employ as the sole criterion for admissions a formula based upon the LSAT and undergraduate grades, nor does it prohibit law schools from evaluating an applicant's prior achievements in light of the barriers that he had to overcome.
 A black applicant who pulled himself out of the ghetto into a junior college may thereby demonstrate a level of motivation, perseverance, and ability that would lead a fairminded admissions committee to conclude that he shows more promise for law study than the son of a rich alumnus who achieved better grades at Harvard. That applicant would be offered admission not because he is black, but because as an individual he has shown he has the potential, while the Harvard man may have taken less advantage of the vastly superior opportunities offered him. Because of the weight of the prior handicaps, that black applicant may not realize his full potential in the first year of law school, or even in the full three years, but in the long pull of a legal career his achievements may far outstrip those of his classmates whose earlier records appeared superior by conventional criteria. There is currently no test available to the Admissions Committee that can predict such possibilities with assurance, but the Committee may nevertheless seek to gauge it as best it can, and weigh this factor in its decisions. 
Such a policy would not be limited to blacks, or Chicanos or Filipinos, or American Indians, although undoubtedly groups such as these may in practice be the principal beneficiaries of it.
 But a poor Appalachian white, or a second generation Chinese in San Francisco, or some other American whose lineage is so diverse as to defy ethnic labels, may demonstrate similar potential and thus be accorded favorable consideration by the Committee
[41]
 (emphases supplied)
On the other hand, in the United Kingdom (
UK
), there is a National Admissions Test for Law (
LNAT
), which was adopted in 2004.
[42]
 It is the only aptitude test currently used in the UK for the selection of people to the legal profession.
[43]
 It was established by a consortium of Universities, comprised of the following: University of Bristol, Durham University, University of Nottingham and University of Oxford, King's College London, LSE London School of Economics and Political Science, and University College London.
[44]
 The LNAT consists of a multiple choice test and a written essay and is designed to measure the following verbal reasoning skills: comprehension, interpretation, analysis, synthesis, induction, and deduction. The test is used by participating UK law schools to aid in the selection of law students.
[45]
Similar to the LSAT in the US, the LNAT is not a substitute for undergraduate grades,
[46]
 applications, personal statements or interviews but is used by each university in the way that best suits its own admissions policy. Different universities place different emphasis on the multiple choice score and the essay question.
[47]
Likewise, in India, there is also a centralized law admission test for National Law Schools, called the Common Law Admission Test (
CLAT
). Before CLAT, each university running Bachelor of Laws courses conducted its own admission test. As a result, students aspiring for good legal education had to write a number of admission tests; and this multiplicity of admission tests caused tremendous hardship, both physically and financially, to candidates. In 2006, this issue was raised in a Writ Petition filed by Varun Bhagat against the Union of India and the various National Law Schools in the Supreme Court of India. In the course of hearing, the Chief Justice of India directed the Union of India to consult with the National Law Schools with a view to evolving a scheme for a common admission test.
[48]
The common admission test required the consensus of all National Law Schools. The University Grants Commission of India brought all seven National Law Schools, namely: National Law School of India University, National Academy of Legal Studies and Research, National Law Institute University, National University of Juridical Sciences, National Law University, Hidayatullah National Law University, and Gujarat National Law University and they finalized the guidelines for the CLAT. It is expected that other national law schools will join in due course.
[49]
 As of 2015, sixteen (16) national law universities in India participate in the CLAT.
[50]
            
Law Admission Test administered by law schools in the Philippines
 
Accordingly, I dissent with the 
ponencia
 that it should still be the LEB who shall lead, control, and regulate the unified admission examinations for law schools.
While a standardized admission test for law schools is constitutionally and legally viable, it must not be the LEB spearheading the admission test. Instead, it must be initiated and organized by the law schools themselves, pursuant to their constitutionally enshrined academic freedom.
Currently, there is an organization of law schools in the country. The PALS, established in 1967, is a non-stock corporation composed of 112 law schools nationwide. It seeks to be a primary driving force in uplifting the standards of legal education in the Philippines to both meeting global standards of excellence and at the same time serve as catalyst for both the economic and human development in Philippine Society.
[51]
As there is an available avenue, law schools in this jurisdiction could certainly organize a standardized admission test pursuant to their academic freedom to determine whom they will admit as their students. As discussed earlier, a unified admission test for law schools proves to be one of the effective mechanisms in determining who among the applicants are mostly likely to succeed in the first year of law study. And, more importantly, this unified admission examination is conducted and organized by the law schools themselves through their academic freedom. Manifestly, this system of unified law admission examination, conducted by the law schools themselves, has been observed and successfully implemented in the United States, U.K. and India.
The flaws in the LEB Memoranda and Orders will not be followed if the law schools will organize this unified admission test. A standardized admission examination must not be the sole measure in determining whether an applicant wilt be accepted in law school. The answers a student can give in an admission examination is limited by the creativity and intelligence of the test-maker. A student with a better or more original understanding of the problem than the test-maker may realize that none of the alternative answers are any good, but there is no way for that student to demonstrate his or her understanding. If a student is strong-minded, nonconformist, unusual, original, or creative, that student must stifle his or her impulses and conform to the norms that the test-maker established. The more profoundly gifted the candidate is, the more his or her resentment will rise against the mental strait jacket into which the testers would force his or her mind.
[52]
 Stated differently, the unified admission test should not be exclusionary.
Accordingly, the law admission test should not be the sole basis for admission in law schools. As discussed earlier, there are other relevant factors, such as undergraduate achievements, motivation, or cultural backgrounds that the admission test cannot measure. Besides the admission test, the law school must still be given discretion to determine on its own, based on its academic freedom, the decision of whom to admit as students. Thus, the proposed standardized admission test should only be one of many criteria for admission to any law school. It would be the decision of each law school whether to accept or deny admission of a potential law student under their academic freedom which would not be curtailed by the unified law entrance examination since it would only be one of several factors for admission.
At the end of the day, the decision of creating a standardized admission test for law schools rests upon the law schools in the country. These institutions of higher learning may come together, through the PALS, and initiate for the creation and implementation of a standardized admission test. It would be the culmination of the collective effort of law schools in their exercise of academic freedom.
In the event that the law schools pursue drafting, creating and organizing a standardized admission test for legal studies in the, Philippines, the LEB would not be entirely set aside in this endeavor. Under R.A. No. 7662, one of the powers of the LEB is to 
supervise
 the law schools in the country.
[53]
The power of supervision is defined as the power of a superior officer to see to it that lower officers perform their functions in accordance with law. This is distinguished from the power of control or the power of an officer to alter or modify or set aside what a subordinate officer had done in the performance of his duties and to substitute the judgment of the former for the latter.
[54]
 An officer in control lays down the rules in the doing of an act. It they are not followed, he may, in his discretion, order the act undone or re-done by his subordinate or he may even decide to do it himself. Supervision does not cover such authority. The supervisor or superintendent merely sees to it that the rules are followed, but he himself does not lay down such rules, nor does he have the discretion to modify or replace them. If the rules are not observed, he may order the work done or re-done but only to conform to the prescribed rules. He may not prescribe his own manner for the doing of the act. He has no judgment on this matter except to see to it that the rules are followed.
[55]
Consequently, the LEB may only supervise the proposed standardized admission test of the law schools. 
It cannot substitute its own judgment with respect to said test organized by the law schools; otherwise, it would violate the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning.
 The LEB may only oversee whether the policies set forth by the law schools in the admission test are reasonable and just. It cannot, however, ultimately override the collective decisions of the law schools in the admission test for law students. In that manner, the LEB serves its purpose in the supervision of legal education and, at the same time, the academic freedom of law schools is respected.
Further, to ensure the success of the law admission test initiated by the law schools in the Philippines and supervised by the LEB, concrete studies on the effectiveness of this test must be conducted. There must be an effective monitoring system for the examination. It must be determined, before and after the admission test, whether said examination actually predicts and helps the success of law students, at the very least, in their first year of legal study. The admission examination should not be conducted for the sake of merely having one. It must have some tangible and definite benefit for the law schools and potential law students. To achieve this quality-control mechanism, the law schools, through PALS, and the LEB must thoroughly coordinate with each other to determine the most effective manner in conducting the admission examinations. It is only through constant cooperation and consultation with the stakeholders that the success of any admission examination will be guaranteed.
While the State has the power to regulate the education of its citizens, the 1987 Constitution expressly grants academic freedom in all institutions of higher learning, including law schools. Thus, the right to determine whom shall be admitted to law school should rest solely in these institutions. The State cannot absolutely control this important pillar of academic freedom of institutes of higher learning. I genuinely believe that it is only through the combined efforts of the law schools in the country that the envisioned unified admission test for law schools can achieve fruition based on the Constitution, the laws, and its practical implementation. Again, the LEB should only supervise the said unified admission examination conducted by the law schools.
Existing problems of the PhilSAT
If the law schools in the Philippines ultimately decide to conduct a unified and standardized law admission examination, as supervised by the LEB, then it must address the existing problems created by the PhilSAT. The problems were created precisely because the admission examination was solely conducted by the LEB, through its regulatory power. The law schools had no concrete voice in the formulation of the PhilSAT and their academic freedom is disrespected. Thus, it created several problems, particularly, financial burden and accessibility.
Under the PhilSAT, the LEB initially imposed a testing fee of P1,500.00 per examination, which was subsequently lowered to P1,000.00;
[56]
 and there are only seven (7) testing centers across the entire country - Baguio City, Metro Manila, Legazpi City, Iloilo City, Cebu City, Davao City and Cagayan de Oro City.
[57]
 Also, the LEB failed to explain why it had to impose said fee for a mere written examination. The sum collected by the LEB for the examination could amount to millions of pesos considering that there are thousands of students taking the PhilSAT. Glaringly, the LEB did not give any sufficient basis to justify the imposition of a P1,000.00 fee for an entrance examination.
Further, the LEB also failed to consider the transportation and logistical expenses that would be incurred by an examinee coming from the far-flung areas to take the examination in the limited seven (7) testing centers. A student from the province explained the immense difficulty of taking the PhilSAT, 
viz
:
6. 
Q:
What personal experience do you have with the PhilSAT exam?
A:
I first took the PhilSAT exam last April 2018.
7. 
Q:
Where did you take the exam?
 
A:
 
Cebu City.
8
Q: 
Are you a permanent resident of Cebu?
A:
 
No.
9.
 
Q:
Where is your permanent residence?
 
A:
 
I am from Maasin City, Leyte.
10.
Q:
 If you are from Leyte, why did you take the exam in Cebu City?
A: 
The LEB offers the exam in only seven (7) testing centers across the country, Cebu being one of them.
11.
Q: 
What effect did this limited number of available testing centers have on your PhilSAT experience?
A: 
Since the exam would not be conducted in our area, I was compelled to travel from Leyte to Cebu City. We had to travel the day after my graduation in order for me to arrive in Cebu on time to take the exam. During the registration period, we also had to travel to another town around five (5) hours away just to deposit the testing fee since the bank in our locality did not accept checkbook as a mode of payment.
[58]
Thus, the unified admission test in the future, spearheaded by the law schools, must impose only reasonable fees to the examinees. 
It should not be a money-making venture.
 The fees of the examination should only be for the exact expense in conducting the admission test; nothing more, nothing less. There should be no additional and unnecessary financial burden imposed on the examinees.
Likewise, the admission test should be accessible to all aspiring law students, especially those from the distant regions. The unified admission test should be conducted in numerous and strategic testing sites spread throughout the country. The law schools must avoid the situation where only those privileged students living in the capital cities will have access to the said unified examination. Moreover, considering that the examination shall now be conducted by the law schools in the Philippines, 
then they may consider conducting the said test in their own school at a unified time and date with the rest of the law schools in the country to guarantee the examination's accessibility
.
It must be underscored that the study of law should not be hindered by financial and geographical hardships; rather, it must be reasonable and accessible to the examinees. Otherwise, it would defeat the purpose of a unified admission examination - to ensure that those intellectually capable to become law students, regardless of social status, shall be admitted to the study of law.
            
The Supreme Court and the study of law
 
The 
ponencia
 states that the Court's rule-making power covers only the practice of law and cannot be unduly widened to cover the study of law. Nonetheless, it declares that the State, though statutes enacted by Congress and administrative regulations issued by the executive, consistently exercise police power over legal education. Hence, admissions, being an area of legal education, necessarily fall within the scope of the State's police power.
I dissent.
It is impossible to completely separate the interests of the Supreme Court and the law schools and the other branches of government with respect to legal education. There are several reasons that the study of law is affected, one way or another, by the Court's rule-making power.
First
, the Court has the exclusive power to promulgate rules for admission to the practice of law. Thus, the Court prescribe specific subjects that a law school must offer before its students can be admitted for the bar examinations. Section 5 of Rule 138 states:
Sec. 5. Additional requirements for other applicants.
 - All applicants for admission other than those referred to in the two preceding sections shall, before being admitted to the examination, satisfactorily show that they have successfully completed all the prescribed courses for the degree of Bachelor of Laws or its equivalent degree, in a law school or university officially recognized by the Philippine Government or by the proper authority in the foreign jurisdiction where the degree has been granted.
No applicant who obtained the Bachelor of Laws degree in this jurisdiction shall be admitted to the bar examination unless he or she has satisfactorily completed the following course in a law school or university duly recognized by the government civil law, commercial law, remedial law, criminal law, public and private international law, political law, labor and social legislation, medical jurisprudence, taxation, legal ethics, and clinical legal education program.
A Filipino citizen who graduated from a foreign law school shall be admitted to the bar examination only upon submission to the Supreme Court of certifications showing: (a) completion of all courses leading to the degree of Bachelor of Laws or its equivalent degree; (b) recognition or accreditation of the law school by the proper authority; and (c) completion of all fourth year subjects in the Bachelor of Laws academic program in a law school duly recognized by the Philippine Government.
[59]
Section 5 provides several requirements for the admission to the bar. Nevertheless, these requirements also affect the curriculum offered by law school. In effect, for a law school to successfully field bar examinees, it must offer all the prescribed courses for the degree of Bachelor of Laws or its equivalent degree. Thus, it cannot simply offer a two (2)-year short course on law.
More importantly, Section 5 provides for the specific courses that must be completed in a law school before a student may be allowed to take the bar examinations, to wit: civil law, commercial law, remedial law, criminal law, public and private international law, political law, labor and social legislation, medical jurisprudence, taxation, legal ethics, and clinical legal education program. Pursuant to this provision, a law school is mandated to offer these courses; otherwise, it will not be able to produce law graduates qualified to take the bar examinations. Stated simply, Section 5 provides for the minimum courses that a law school must offer to its law students. This is one of the direct provisions of the Rules of Court that the Court itself participate in the legal education of law students.
Second
, even before a student begins his study of law, the Supreme Court already provides the requirements for his or her pre-law studies. Section 6 of Rule 138 states:
Sec. 6. Pre-Law.
 - No applicant for admission to the bar examination shall be admitted unless he presents a certificate that he has satisfied the Secretary of Education that, before he began the study of law, he had pursued and satisfactorily completed in an authorized and recognized university or college, requiring for admission thereto the completion of a four-year high school course, the course of study prescribed therein for a bachelor's degree in arts or sciences with any of the following subjects as major or field of concentration: political science, logic, english, spanish, history and economics.
The above-quoted provision provides that any potential law student must have a four-year high school course and a bachelor's degree in arts or sciences. If a law school admits students without these completed courses, then it will not be able to produce bar examinees. Verily, this rule affects the admission policy of the institutes of higher learning with respect to law students.
Third
, the precursor of Republic Act No. 7662, which is DECS Order No. 27, also recognizes that the Supreme Court contributes to the requirements for admission in law courses, to wit:
Article VIII
Admission, Residence and Other Requirements
Section 1.
 No applicant shall be enrolled in the law course unless he complies with specific requirements for admission by the Bureau of Higher Education and 
the Supreme Court of the Philippines
, for which purpose he must present to the registrar the necessary credentials before the end of the enrolment period.
Lastly
, even after earning a law degree, the Supreme Court continues to participate in the study of law. Bar Matter No. 850, which was adopted by the Court on August 22, 2000, provides for the Mandatory Continuing Legal Education requirement for members of the Bar. Continuing legal education is required of members of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines (
IBP
) to ensure that throughout their career, they keep abreast with law and jurisprudence, maintain the ethics of the profession and enhance the standards of the practice of law.
[60]
Similarly, the Philippine Judicial Academy (
PHILJA
), initially created by the Supreme Court on March 12, 1996 through the issuance of Administrative Order No. 35-96, is a separate but component unit of the Supreme Court. It is an all-important factor in the promotion of judicial education in the Philippines. It receives full patronage and support from the Court which guarantees the participation of judges and court personnel in its programs and activities. PHILJA was institutionalized as a training school for justices, judges, court personnel, lawyers, and aspirants to judicial posts.
[61]
            
Coordination and cooperation with the various stakeholders in legal education
 
The Supreme Court, either directly or indirectly, affects the legal education administered by the law schools as institutes of higher learning. The Court's authority over legal education is primarily observed in the bar examinations. Nevertheless, such authority or influence of the Court over legal education should be viewed in a coordinated and cooperative manner; and not as a limitation or restriction.
For more than a century, the bar examinations conducted by the Court have been the centerpiece of every law student's plight. The preparation, success and defeat of bar examinees are annual recurrences. The low passing percentage of the bar examinations proves it as one of the most difficult tests in the country. There are on-going initiatives to remedy this predicament and improve the legal education.
However, it must be stressed that the bar examination is not the sole and penultimate goal of the study of law. There is no clear evidence that grades and other evaluators of law school performance, and even the bar examination, are particularly good predictors of competence or success as a lawyer.
[62]
 The legal education is a wide spectrum of discipline, ranging from the traditional subjects of political, civil, and remedial laws, to the liberal and innovative subjects of media, sports, and competition laws. It is not confined to litigation practice, court hearings, and drafting pleadings and other legal documents. The study of law is a dynamic concept that seeks to analyze, comprehend and apply the effects and interrelationships of the Constitution, laws, rules, and regulations, in view of a just and humane society.
Thus, instead of restricting the study of law only to the bar examinations, the Court must endeavor to promote its liberalization. The bar-Â­centric mindset of law schools must be amended. It must be emphasized that legal education should not confine law students to the syllabi for bar examinations. Instead, law schools must encourage their students to freely take elective subjects that spark their interests; participate in legal aid clinics to render free legal service; experience debate and moot court competitions; and publish law journal articles for their respective schools. These liberalizations of legal education must be accomplished for the enrichment of the law student's knowledge. In order to implement these innovative measures, various stakeholders in the entire country must be consulted and conferred with to ensure active, wide, and effective participation.
Notably, the Court has recently issued A.M. No. 19-03-24-SC,
[63]
 otherwise known as the Revised Law Student Practice Rule, which liberalizes the Law Student Practice. It was issued to ensure access to justice for the marginalized sectors, to enhance learning opportunities of law students, to instill among them the value of legal professional social responsibility, and to prepare them for the practice of law. Further, the completion of clinical legal education courses was made a prerequisite of the bar examinations to produce practice-ready lawyers. Thus, the Court recognizes that, aside from the written bar examination, the practical aspect of legal education is an essential component in the formation of competent and able lawyers.
Again, while the Supreme Court has some authority over the legal education, this should be channeled in cooperation and coordination with different law schools of the country and even with the legislative and executive branch of the government, through the LEB. At best, the Court should only provide the minimum course requirements for the purpose of the bar examinations and should not be considered as a hindrance the study of law. Beyond that, law schools are directed to promote the innovative measures in legal education in furtherance of their academic freedom. Through a comprehensive and novel approach, the goal of improving the legal education is definitely within reach.
Constitutionality of R.A. No. 7662
One of the issues raised by the parties is that R.A. No. 7662 is unconstitutional because it infringes on the power of the Court to supervise the bar examination and legal education.
With respect to that issue, the Court must emphasize the doctrine of constitutional avoidance. The doctrine states that this Court may choose to ignore or side-step a constitutional question if there is some other ground upon which the case can be disposed of.
[64]
 To remain true to its democratic moorings, judicial involvement must remain guided by a framework or deference and constitutional avoidance. This same principle underlies the basic doctrine that courts are to refrain from issuing advisory opinions. Specifically as regards this Court, only constitutional issues that are narrowly framed, sufficient to resolve an actual case, may be entertained.
[65]
 In other words, if the determination of the constitutionality of a particular statute can be avoided based on some other ground, then the Court will not touch upon the issue of unconstitutionality.
Here, the powers of the LEB enumerated under Section 7 of R.A. No. 7662 are assailed because they contradict the judicial power of the Court. Section 5, Article VIII of the 1987 Constitution states:
Section 5.
 The Supreme Court shall have the following powers:
x x x x
(5) Promulgate rules concerning the protection and enforcement of constitutional rights, pleading, practice, and procedure in all courts, 
the admission to the practice of law, the integrated bar, and legal assistance to the under-privileged
. Such rules shall provide a simplified and inexpensive procedure for the speedy disposition of cases, shall be uniform for all courts of the same grade, and shall not diminish, increase, or modify substantive rights. Rules of procedure of special courts and quasi-judicial bodies shall remain effective unless disapproved by the Supreme Court.
Some of the powers of the LEB under R.A. No. 7662 can be harmonized with the Constitution. For instance, Section 7(c) of R.A. No. 7662 states:
Section 7. Powers and Functions.
 - For the purpose of achieving the objectives of this Act, the Board shall have the following powers and functions:
x x x x
(c) to set the standards of accreditation for law schools taking into account, among others, the size of enrollment, the qualifications of the members of the faculty, the library and other facilities, 
without encroaching upon the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning[.]
 (emphasis supplied)
Said provision states that the LEB has the power to set the standards of accreditation for law schools. However, it also provides for a reasonable limitation on the exercise of such power: it should not encroach the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning. With this, the law schools are safeguarded that the LEB will not arbitrarily exercise its power to set the standards of accreditation because of the reasonable limitation of academic freedom. This reasonable limitation should also be read together with the other powers provided by R.A. No. 7662 so that the LEB will not encroach upon the constitutional rights of law schools. Pursuant to this interpretation, majority of the powers of the LEB listed under the law will conform to the organic law and the Court will not be required to pass upon the constitutionality of these statutory provisions.
However, under Section 7 of R.A. No. 7662, there is a provision that is inescapably unconstitutional. No amount of judicial interpretation can evade the inevitable conclusion that this provision violates the Constitution. Section 7(h) of R.A. No. 7662 states:
Section 7. Powers and Functions. - For the purpose of achieving the objectives of this Act, the Board shall have the following powers and functions:
x x x x
(h) to adopt a system of continuing legal education. For this purpose, the Board may provide for the mandatory attendance of 
practicing lawyers
 in such courses and for such duration as the Board may deem necessary[.] (emphasis supplied)
The provision clearly covers the continuing legal education of practicing lawyers. However, Section 5(5), Article VIII of the Constitution states that the Supreme Court has the exclusive judicial power to: "[p]romulgate rules concerning the protection and enforcement of constitutional rights, pleading, 
practice
, and procedure in all courts, the admission to the practice of law, the Integrated Bar, and legal assistance to the under-privileged." Accordingly, only the Court has the power to prescribe rules with respect to the continuing practice of lawyers.
Pursuant to this judicial power, the Court issued Bar Matter No. 850 dated August 22, 2000, adopting the rules on Mandatory Continuing Legal Education for members of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines (
IBP
). Continuing legal education is required of members of the IBP to ensure that throughout their career, they keep abreast with law and jurisprudence, maintain the ethics of the profession and enhance the standards of the practice of law.
[66]
Here, Section 7(h) covers the continuing legal education of practicing lawyers. Evidently, this encroaches upon the power of the Court to promulgate rules on the practice of lawyers. The objective of R.A. No. 7662 is only to effect reforms in the Philippine legal education, not in the legal profession. In his Explanatory Note in B.M. No. 979-B, Associate Justice Jose C. Vitug stated that the concept of continuing legal education encompasses not only law students but also the members of the legal profession. The inclusion of the continuing legal education under R.A. No. 7662 implies that the LEB has jurisdiction over the education of persons who have finished the law course and are already licensed to practice law. In other words, this particular power, directly involves members of the legal profession, which is outside the realm of R.A. No. 7662. Undeniably, Section 7(h) of R.A. No. 7662 is unconstitutional because it violates Section 5(5), Article VIII of the Constitution.
Fate of the Legal Education Board
The 
ponencia
 states that LEB Memorandum Orders and Circular regarding the PhilSAT are unconstitutional because these do not meet the fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements. Nevertheless, it states that Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662 is constitutional insofar as it gives the LEB, an agency of the executive branch, the power to prescribe the minimum requisites for admission to legal education.
I concur.
Although PhilSAT is declared unconstitutional for employing unreasonable means for the admission of students to law schools, the LEB still has numerous powers and responsibilities under its charter. As stated above, one of its vital functions is its power to accredit and set the standards of accreditation for law schools taking into account, among others, the size of enrollment, the qualifications of the members of the faculty, the library and other facilities.
[67]
 If a law school is underperforming, the LEB may withdraw or downgrade the accreditation status of such law school, especially if it fails to maintain the required standards. This is an important role in ensuring that law schools keep an adequate, satisfactory, and respectable curriculum program for its law students.
Likewise, I agree with the Office of the Solicitor General that the powers and functions of the LEB should be read in accordance with its mandate to guide law students and law schools.
[68]
 R.A. No. 7662 should not be interpreted to include matters that are already within the exclusive jurisdiction of Court, such as the bar examinations, law student practice, and the practice of law.
In addition, the powers and functions of the LEB should always be interpreted in light of the institutes of higher learning's academic freedom. Thus, the LEB should consider the academic freedom of law schools when it issues orders, circulars, and regulations under its power of supervision. The Constitution bestows institutes of higher learning academic freedom, which is further compromised of several freedoms. These freedoms may only be subjected to reasonable limitations. Anything beyond reasonable, or arbitrary, shall be considered an infringement of such freedoms.
The importance of LEB's role in improving the legal education in our country cannot be overemphasized. It can bridge the gap between the different law schools from the capital cities to the far-flung areas in the provinces. It can conduct studies and give recommendations on how to improve the state of legal education. It can also promote the innovative approaches in the holistic study of law. This can be achieved if the LEB is open and willing to coordinate, through consultations and meetings, with the various stakeholders, law schools, government agencies, and the Supreme Court.
However, the LEB should be strictly warned that it should not gravely abuse its discretion.
 Otherwise, the Court will not think twice in striking down any arbitrary exercise of power, including those that violate the fundamental rights of institutions of higher learning under their academic freedom.
Conclusion
I sincerely believe that it is now high time to develop, innovate, modernize, and improve the legal education system in our country. The petitions at bench are valuable opportunities for the esteemed members of the Court to discuss and examine the current and future state of legal education in the country. The different stakeholders must assess and recommend innovations and improvements in the country's state of legal education in view of the changes brought about by the developments in law, the needs of the people, and technological innovations. Verily, the stakeholders should be concerned in remodeling legal education because it is an indisputable fact that legal education is the very foundation upon which the exercise of the law profession rests.
The Court has repeatedly emphasized that the practice of law is imbued with public interest, and that a lawyer owes substantial duties, not only to his client, but also to his brethren in the profession, to the courts, and to the public, and takes part in the administration of justice, one of the most important functions of the State, as an officer of the court. Accordingly, lawyers are bound to maintain, not only a high standard of legal proficiency, but also of morality, honesty, integrity, and fair dealing.
[69]
This goal of remodeling legal education will be realized through a multi-sectoral approach of cooperation, initiative, and the promotion of free-Â­thinking. The outdated, obsolete, and unproductive aspects in legal education that cause disadvantageous effects to the study of law should definitely be set aside. It must be underscored that the purpose of the study of law is not only to successfully hurdle the bar examinations, but also to produce competent and noble lawyers who shall represent and stand up for justice, truth, and equity for the benefit and welfare of the Filipino people.
I vote to 
PARTLY GRANT
 the consolidated petitions. The PhilSAT should be 
SET ASIDE
. It must be the law schools of the Philippines, through the Philippine Association of Law Schools, under the supervision of the Legal Education Board, which should formulate the unified and standardized law admission examination, carrying only reasonable fees and accessible to all aspiring law students.
[1]
 
Heirs of Piedad v. Exec. Judge Estrera
, 623 Phil. 178, 188 (2009).
[2]
 
Royal Lines, Inc. v. Court of Appeals
, 227 Phil. 570, 575 (1986).
[3]
 294 Phil. 654 (1993).
[4]
 Id. at 672-673.
[5]
 Id. at 673.
[6]
 354 U.S. 234 (1957).
[7]
 Id.
[8]
 Id.
[9]
 385 U.S. 589 (1967).
[10]
 438 U.S. 265 (1978).
[11]
 Id.
[12]
 539 U.S. 306 (2003).
[13]
 539 U.S. 244 (2003).
[14]
 570 U.S. 297 (2013).
[15]
 408 Phil. 132 (2001).
[16]
 Id. at 145.
[17]
 Id. at 145-146.
[18]
 I60-A Phil. 929 (1975).
[19]
 Id. at 945.
[20]
 Supra note 3.
[21]
 Id. at 675.
[22]
 258-A Phil. 417 (1989).
[23]
 Id. at 423.
[24]
 298 Phil. 382 (1993).
[25]
 Id. at 388.
[26]
 487 Phil. 449 (2004).
[27]
 Id. at 466.
[28]
 
Philippine Association of Service Exporters, Inc. v. Hon. Drilon
, 246 Phil. 393, 399 (1988).
[29]
 236 Phil. 768 (1987).
[30]
 
See
 Developing and Assembling the Law School Admission Test, Ronald Armstrong, Dmitry Belov, Alexander Weissman, Interfaces, Vol. 35, No. 2, March - April 2005, p. 141.
[31]
 
See
 Standard 503, Chapter 5, Admission and Student Services, 2017-2018 American Bar Association Standards and Rules of Procedure.
[32]
 Wigmore, Juristic Psychopoyemetrology-Or, How to Find Out Whether a Boy Has the Makings of a Lawyer, 24 Ill. L. Rev. 454, 463-464 (1929).
[33]
 Dissenting Opinion of Associate Justice William O. Douglas in DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U.S. 312 (1974).
[34]
 WILLIAM P. LAPIANA, A History of the Law School Admission Council and the LSAT, Keynote Address, 1998 LSAC Annual Meeting.
[35]
 Id. at 5-6.
[36]
 Id.
[37]
 Id. at 6 & 8.
[38]
 Id. at 10.
[39]
 Id. at 8.
[40]
 416 U.S. 312 (1974). The 
ponencia
 therein denied the petition questioning the Admission Policy of University of Washington Law School in treating minorities differently in their admission to law school. It was essentially denied because the petitioner therein will already complete his law school studies, hence, the petition was moot.
[41]
 Id.
[42]
 New entry test for law students, BBC News, February 2, 2014, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/education/3451897.stm
 [last accessed September 3, 2019].
[43]
 Aptitude Testing and the Legal Profession, Dr. Chris Dewberry, Birkbeck, University of London, June 6, 2011, p. 61, (2011).
[44]
 WHY JOIN LNAT?, LNAT National Admission Test for Law, 
https://lnat.ac.uk/why-join-lnat/
 [last accessed September 3, 2019].
[45]
 Supra note 43 at 61-62.
[46]
 In the UK, undergraduate grades are measured through A-Levels and General Certificate of Secondary Education (
GCSE
).
[47]
 Supra note 44.
[48]
 The Pearson Guide to the LLB Entrance Examinations, Edgar Thorpe and Showick Thorpe, Pearson Education India, p. 22, 2008.
[49]
 Id.
[50]
 NLUs enter into new CLAT MoU, ensuring full participation of all 16 NLUs (except NLU Delhi), Shrivastava, Prachi, Legally India, 
https://www.legallyindia.com/pre-law/all-16-nlus-can-now-conduct-clatÂ­-unlike-earlier-7-20141103-5262
 [last accessed September 3, 2019].
[51]
 PALS reelect UE Dean Valdez, University of the East News, March 16, 2012, [
https://www.ue.edu.ph/news/?p=2786
 last accessed August 15, 2019].
[52]
 
See
 Dissenting Opinion of Associate Justice William O. Douglas in DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U.S. 312 (1974), citing B. Hoffmann, The Tyranny of Testing 91-92 (1962).
[53]
 
See
 Section 7(b) of R.A. No. 7662.
[54]
 
Bito-onon v. Hon. Yap Fernandez
, 403 Phil. 693, 702 (2001).
[55]
 
Hon. Drilon v. Mayor Lim
, 305 Phil. 146, 152 (1994).
[56]
 Memorandum of petitioner in G.R. No. 245954, p. 33.
[57]
 Sec. 5, LEB Memorandum Order No. 7, series of 2016.
[58]
 Judicial Affidavit of petitioner Gretchen M. Vasquez, Annex F of Memorandum of Abayata, et al., p. 3.
[59]
 As amended by A.M. 19-03-24-SC, Amendment of Rule 138, Section 5 in relation to the Revision of Rule 138-A of the Rules of Court, July 23, 2019.
[60]
 Section 1, Bar Matter No. 850.
[61]
 History of PHILJA, 
http://philja.judiciary.gov.ph/history.html
 [last accessed: June 6, 2019].
[62]
 
See
 Dissenting Opinion of Associate Justice William O. Douglas in DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U.S. 312 (1974); citing Rosen, Equalizing Access to Legal Education: Special Programs for Law Students Who Are Not Admissible by Tradlitional Criteria, 1970 U. Tol. L. Rev. 321, 332-333.
[63]
 Dated June 25, 2019.
[64]
 
See
 Dissenting Opinion of Justice Del Castillo, 
Poe-Llamanzares v. Commission on Elections
, 782 Phil. 292, 357-363 (2016).
[65]
 
David v. Senate Electoral Tribunal
, 795 Phil. 529, 575 (2016).
[66]
 Section 1, Bar Matter No. 850.
[67]
 Section 7(c) & (d).
[68]
 
See
 Memorandum of the Office of the Solicitor General, pp. 38-39.
[69]
 
Atty. Villonco v. Atty. Roxas
, A.C. No. 9186, April 11, 2018.
CONCURRING and DISSENTING OPINION
LAZARO-JAVIER, J:
 
 
We all have different competencies. Some of us are intellectually gifted, some of us athletically gifted, some of us are great listeners. Everyone has a different level of what they can do.
[1]
 
 
 
Don't take on things you don't believe in and that you yourself are not good at. Learn to say no. Effective leaders match the objective needs of their company with the subjective competencies. As a result, they get an enormous amount of things done fast.
[2]
PREFATORY
The pursuit of excellence has never been a bad thing. From our ranks, we shower accolades to the best, brightest, most efficient, most innovative - the cut above the rest. Soon, the Court will again be recognizing excellence of execution among our judges and clerks of court, conferring on them the judicial excellence awards. These awards do not come cheap. They are laden with perks and advantages that are sorely denied others. Yet this is not discrimination. The differential treatment is not based on something like the color of one's skin or the circumstances regarding one's birth-the differential treatment arises not from an unchanging and unchangeable characteristics and traits, but from circumstances largely within the awardees' control and efforts. Exclusion necessarily comes with quality.
To strive for excellence and to require others to also trail this path in matters of privilege is not usurping that other's role in this regard. This is the case where the 
requirer
 of excellence shares the same goal of excellence as the 
required
. More in point to the present cases, who would 
not
 want something more from a law student whose answer to the following question is as follows -
Teacher: Q - What are fruits as they relate to our study of Obligations & Contracts?
Student - "The Obligations and contracts is very beneficial to our life. The fruit I relate is Banana. This fruit have a vitamins and it gave the beneficial like became taller."
[3]
Each of us has distinct competencies. Some run quicker than others. A few love to ruminate. There are fifteen (15) Justices in the Court, and in a room full of lawyers and judges, this is as exclusive as it can get. Of the several hundreds who take the Bar, not everyone gets over the hurdle. In any World Cup, there are only a number of aspirants. The top-tier law schools cannot accommodate a slew of the applicants. It is not society's fault that not every Army officer comes from the Philippine Military Academy, or a lawyer can claim blue, maroon, red, yellow, or green as the color of his or her scholastic pedigree. The right of each citizen to select a course of study is subject to fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements.
If we are agreed that quality and excellence and their resulting exclusionary effect are valid objectives in any institution of higher learning like law schools, we next ask, who decides whom to accept in such institutions, like law schools? We should also be concerned with things like curriculum, faculty internal administration, library, laboratory class and other facilities.
[4]
 This is because when we speak of quality education we have in mind such matters, among others, as curriculum development, development of learning resources and instructional materials, upgrading of library and laboratory facilities, innovations in educational technology and teaching methodologies, improvement of research quality, and others.
[5]
 Who speaks for these requisites?
ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK
To resolve the cases here, it is important to understand the relationship of the intersecting constitutional rights and interests as visually reflected below:
(image supposed to be here)
Not one of these rights and interests is superior to any of the others.
 Each has an impact on any of the others in terms of meaning and application. It is the Court's duty to weigh and balance these rights and interests according to the circumstances of each case.
In the exercise of the 
State's power to reasonably supervise and regulate all educational institutions
, the State is mandated to protect and promote not just any access to education but access to 
quality
 education. So the State is expected to initiate, innovate, and implement measures to achieve this objective.
It is established that "the 
duty of providing quality education entails the duty of screening those who seek education
. Necessarily too, 
the talent that is required in order to merit quality education goes up as one goes higher in the educational ladder of progression
. . . . As already seen, however, there is also recognition of the right of the school to impose admission standards. 
The State itself may also set admission standards.
"
[6]
Which of the State agencies is responsible for this task? The Court has already recognized that -
. . . . the Constitution indeed mandates 
the State to provide quality education
, the 
determination of what constitutes quality education
 is 
best left with the political departments who have the necessary knowledge, expertise, and resources to determine the same
. The deliberations of the Constitutional Commission again are very instructive:
Now, Madam President, 
we have added the word "quality" before "education" to send appropriate signals to the government that, in the exercise of its supervisory and regulatory powers, it should first set satisfactory minimum requirements in all areas: curriculum, faculty, internal administration, library, laboratory class and other facilities, et cetera, and it should see to it that satisfactory minimum requirements are met by all educational institutions
, both public and private. When we speak of quality education we have in mind such matters, among others, as curriculum development, development of learning resources and instructional materials, upgrading of library and laboratory facilities, innovations in educational technology and teaching methodologies, improvement of research quality, and others.
Here and in many other provisions on education, the principal focus of attention and concern is the students. I would like to say that in my view there is a slogan when we speak of quality of education that I feel we should be aware of, which is, "Better than ever is not enough." In other words, even if the quality of education is good now, we should attempt to keep on improving it.
[7]
 (
emphasis added
)
A citizen - not any individual but a citizen - has the right to select a profession or a course of study leading to that chosen profession; however, the citizen is not guaranteed admission to the profession or to the course of study and school of his or her choosing.
 The right given to every citizen is 
to select
 - a profession or course of study. BUT this right 
does not necessarily give rise to and guarantee
 a right to pursue, and engage in, the chosen profession of the citizen or a right to be admitted to the course of study and school of the citizen's choosing
. The citizen must have to consider the 
State's duty to regulate and supervise 
reasonably
 educational institutions
, 
which would have to include measures
 to assure the citizen's access to 
quality
 education, as well as the 
express limitation inherent in every citizen's right to select
 a profession or course of study, i.e. - - - 
fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements
.
As the intersecting rights and interests show, the 
State
 has a stake in the determination and imposition of the 
fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements
 
through
 the 
duty
 of the 
political departments
 of the State to reasonably regulate and supervise educational institutions
 towards, among others, assuring the citizen of access to 
quality
 education.
In addition
, the 
Constitution
 also recognizes the important role that 
academic freedom
 plays in providing 
quality
 education. 
Institutions of higher learning including law schools enjoy academic freedom in the highest legal order possible.
 Written in jurisprudence are the substance and parameters of this constitutional privilege and duty which entitles its holders to determine for itself on academic grounds 
who may teach, what may be taught, how it shall be taught, and who may be admitted to study
. Subsumed under this entitlement is the capacity of institutions of higher learning to determine and impose 
fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements
.
Both the State
 through its political departments 
and
 the institutions of higher learning
 have roles to play in providing our 
citizens
 access to 
quality
 education. It is 
our duty
 to 
balance
 the 
academic freedom of institutions of higher learning
 and the 
State's exercise of reasonable supervision and regulation
. 
Academic freedom is not absolute.
The foregoing rights and interests of the State, the citizen, and the institutions of higher learning interplay in the present cases. These rights and interests very strongly suggest that these cases 
are not and have never been about
 a 
willy-nilly
 and 
free-wheeling intellectual inquiry
 of individuals on the nature of the law or its relevance to everyday life and its application to real life situations, or about those individuals whose only interest in obtaining legal education is to get qualified for some higher civil service postings.
Individuals 
are not forbidden
 from learning the law for whatever motives or purposes they may each have. Every individual has the freedom of intellectual and non-intellectual inquiry, a cognate of each one's freedom of thought, expression, and speech that is not in any way restricted by the discussion and ruling which follows.
It is important that 
we see through the distinction between intellectual inquiry within the narrow confines of educational institutions like law schools and a citizen's political right of free expression
. In this light, 
academic freedom and the State's power of reasonable supervision and regulation of all educational institutions bear upon
 the 
context
 of the 
narrower academic community.
[8]
 This is 
different from
 an 
individual's freedom of expression
 which 
encompasses his or her freedom of intellectual inquiry
 for whatever purposes it may serve him or her.
For clarity and emphasis
, what we are dealing with here is 
different
 from merely wanting to study law for its own sake or for immediate career advancement which a law degree carries in the civil service. Our endeavour here is a 
distinct
 proposition that has a life of its own. In the words of the Court in 
Garcia v. Faculty Admissions Committee
,
[9]
 "[i]t is equally 
difficult to yield conformity to
 the approach taken that 
colleges and universities should be looked upon as public utilities devoid of any discretion as to whom to admit or reject. Education, especially higher education, belongs to a different, and certainly, higher category
."
Here, the 
issues
 are defined by the 
education of
 and 
learning by citizens within the confines of an educational institution
 whose 
existence and operation are imbued with public concern
, to 
pursue a course of study subject to reasonable regulation and supervision
 by 
both the State and the law school
, as to 
access, quality
 and 
admission, and academic requirements
, where the 
citizen
 if successful gets 
entitled to qualify for
 and 
engage in
 a 
profession
 that 
we all admit
 to be 
noble
 and 
suffused with public interest
.
I understand that some eager students would have their dreams of becoming law students scuttled. To this situation, I have only to stress the advice reflected in my chosen epigraphs above -
We all have different competencies. Some of us are intellectually gifted, some of us athletically gifted, some of us are great listeners. Everyone has a different level of what they can do.
Don't take on things you don't believe in and that you yourself are not good at. Learn to say no. Effective leaders match the objective needs of their company with the subjective competencies. As a result, they get an enormous amount of things done fast.
In the context of the Philippine Law School Admission Test (PhiLSAT), whose validity as a screening mechanism I stand by as my resolution to this Opinion's second issue. Indeed, nothing can be more liberating than taking the epigraphs to heart and to bear on one's aspirations in life.
Our task is to consider carefully, weigh and balance the rights and interests of these stakeholders.
 Each is equally important, compelling, and relevant as the next right and interest. Not one is superior to another, though one may qualify the other. When considered, weighed, and balanced properly, these rights and interests will form the tapestry against which we will be able to judge the validity of the assailed statutory provisions and the relevant founding regulation. I now endeavour to do this and more.
THOUGHTFUL RUMINATIONS
First.
 I have been confronted with the idea that as regards 
education in institutions of higher learning
, the State's supervisory and regulatory power is only an 
auxiliary
 power in relation to educational institutions, be it basic, secondary, or higher education. It has been said that this must be necessarily so because the right and duty to educate, being part and parcel of youth-rearing, does not inure to the State at the first instance. Rather, it belongs essentially and naturally to the parents who surrender it by delegation to the educational institutions.
I beg to differ. It is well-taken if this idea were referring only to 
preÂ­school
 or 
elementary school
 students. But the cases here are not about the education of young and impressionable children. They are about 
the education which molds an individual into a legal professional
, the one whom another would meet to seek help about his or her life, liberty, or property. Nor are the cases here about nurturing generally socially acceptable values.
They are about piecing together building blocks 
to develop focused core values essential to professions, including the legal profession
. With respect to the latter, regardless of how a potential student of law has been reared by his or her or its natural or surrogate parents, 
he or she must learn focused core values that the confluence of private and public communities relevant to the legal profession has judged to be important
. In fact, 
some of these focused core values may be different from the basic values which the potential student of law may have been taught at home
.
For example:
Home Values
Lawyer's Values
1. Be Honest
1. Duty of Confidentiality
2. Defend Only The Good Ones
2. Right to Counsel and Duty of Loyalty to Client
3. Love and Defend Your Family
3. Avoid Conflict of Interest in the Performance of Lawyer's Duties
To stress, the 
duty of providing quality education entails the duty of screening those who seek education
. Necessarily too, 
the talent that is required in order to merit quality education goes up as one goes higher in the educational ladder of progression
 . . . ."
[10]
The 
State's supervisory and regulatory power in relation to prescribing the minimum admission requirements
 has been said to be a component of police power, which as explained in 
Tablarin v. Gutierrez
,
[11]
 "is the 
pervasive
 and 
non-waivable power and authority
 of the 
sovereign to secure and promote all the important interests and needs
 - in a word, 
the public order - of the general community
." Hence, the 
State's supervisory and regulatory power over institutions of higher learning 
cannot be characterized
 as a mere auxiliary power in the ordinary sense of being just a spare, substitute, or supplementary power.
Second.
 There are three (3) issues to be resolved here:
1. Which State agent - the Supreme Court or the Legal Education Board or both - is responsible for exercising reasonable regulation and supervision of all educational institutions? In this regard, is the reasonable regulation and supervision of legal education within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court? If it is, what is the exact jurisdiction of the Supreme Court over the reasonable regulation and supervision of legal education? May this jurisdiction be assigned or delegated to or shared with the Legal Education Board created under RA 7662?
2. Do Subsection 7(e) of RA 7662
[12]
 and Legal Education Board Memorandum Order No. 7, series of 2016, (LEBMO No. 7) fall within the constitutionally-permissible supervision and regulation?
3. Are Subsections 7(g) and (h) of RA 7662
[13]
 
ultra vires
 for encroaching into the constitutional powers of the Supreme Court.
Let me address these issues sequentially.
Which State agent - the Supreme Court or Congress and the Legal Education Board or both - is responsible for exercising reasonable regulation and supervision of all educational institutions? In this regard, is the reasonable regulation and supervision of legal education within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court? If it is, what is the exact jurisdiction of the Supreme Court over the reasonable regulation and supervision of legal education? May this jurisdiction be assigned or delegated to or shared with Congress and the Legal Education Board created under RA 7662?
I 
accept
 the 
Decision's
 ruling that 
Congress and the Legal Education Board have primary and direct jurisdiction
 to exercise reasonable supervision and regulation of legal education and the law schools providing them. The 
Supreme Court has no primary and direct jurisdiction
 over legal education and law schools.
The Supreme Court, however, is 
not entirely irrelevant when it comes to legal education
. 
Although the primary and direct responsibility
 rests with Congress and the Legal Education Board to reasonably supervise and regulate legal education and law schools, the Supreme Court 
can and will intervene
 when a justiciable controversy hounds the discharge of the Legal Education Board's duties. The Supreme Court 
will also have to intervene when its power to administer admission to the Bar
 is infringed. 
Admission to law school is far different from admission to the Bar.
 As the 
Decision
 has aptly discussed, 
historically, textually, practicably
, and 
legally
, there has been 
no
 demonstrable assignment of the function to supervise and regulate legal education to the Supreme Court.
Textual.
 The confusion regarding the Supreme Court's supervisory and regulatory role stems from Subsection 5(5) of Article VIII of the 
Constitution
 which enunciates 
the power of the Supreme Court to promulgate rules concerning the admission to the practice of law
.
Admission to the practice of law
, however, 
is not the same as
 
law school admission
, which is part and parcel of legal education regulation and supervision. The former presupposes the completion of a law degree and the submission of an application for the Bar examinations, among others. In terms of proximity to membership in the Bar, 
admission to the practice of law
 is 
already far deep into the process
, the 
outcome of legal education
 
plus compliance with so many more criteria
.
[14]
 On the other hand, 
law admission
 signals 
only the start of the long and arduous 
process
 of legal education
. It is therefore speculative and somehow presumptuous to consider an applicant for 
law admission
 as already a candidate for 
admission to the practice of law
.
Clearly, Subsection 5(5) of Article VIII 
cannot be the source of power of the Supreme Court
 to exercise reasonable supervision and regulation of legal education and law schools as a primary and direct jurisdiction.
Historical.
 The Supreme Court 
has not played a primary and direct role
 in regulating and supervising legal education and law schools. Legal education and law schools 
have been consistently placed
 for supervision and regulation under the jurisdiction of the legislature, and in turn, the country's education departments.
For instance, it was the 
University of the Philippines College of Law
 which pioneered the legal education curriculum in the Philippines. 
On the basis of statutory authority
, the 
Bureau of Private Schools
 acted as supervisor of law schools and national coordinator of law deans. Thereafter, the 
Bureau of Higher Education
 regulated law schools. Still further later, 
DECS Order No. 27-1989, series of 1989
 outlined the policies and standards for legal education, qualifications, and functions of a law dean, and qualifications, compensation and conditions of employment of law faculty, formulated a law curriculum, and imposed law admission standards.
Impracticable.
 The Supreme Court 
has no office and staff
 dedicated to the task of supervising and regulating legal education and law schools. It also 
has no expertise
 as educators of these tertiary students. It has 
no budget item
 for this purpose.
Legal.
 Section 12 of Article VIII of the Constitution
[15]
 
prohibits members of the Supreme Court
 from being designated to any agency (
which includes functions
) 
performing quasi-judicial or administrative functions
. The spirit of this prohibition 
precludes the Court from
 
exercising reasonable supervision and regulation of legal education and law schools
. The 
reason
 is that 
this task involves administrative functions
 - "those which involve the regulation and control over the conduct and affairs of individuals for their own welfare and the promulgation of rules and regulations to better carry out the policy of the legislature or such as are devolved upon the administrative agency by the organic law of its existence."
[16]
Manila Electric Co. v. Pasay Transportation Co.
[17]
 has emphasized that 
the Supreme Court should only exercise judicial power and should not assume any duty which does not pertain to the administering of judicial functions
. In that case, a petition was filed requesting the members of the Supreme Court, sitting as a board of arbitrators, to fix the terms and the compensation to be paid to Manila Electric Company for the use of right of way. The Court held that it would be improper and illegal for the members of the Supreme Court, sitting as a board of arbitrators, whose decision shall be final, to act on the petition of Manila Electric Company. The Court explained:
We run counter to this dilemma. Either the members of the Supreme Court, sitting as a board of arbitrators, exercise judicial functions, or as members of the Supreme Court, sitting as a board of arbitrators, 
exercise administrative or 
quasi
 judicial functions
. The first case would appear not to fall within the jurisdiction granted the Supreme Court. Even conceding that it does, it would presuppose the right to bring the matter in dispute before the courts, for any other construction would tend to oust the courts of jurisdiction and render the award a nullity. But if this be the proper construction, 
we would then have the anomaly of a decision by the members of the Supreme Court, sitting as a board of arbitrators, taken therefrom to the courts and eventually coming before the Supreme Court, where the Supreme Court would review the decision of its members acting as arbitrators
. Or in the second case, 
if the functions performed by the members of the Supreme Court, sitting as a board of arbitrators, be considered as administrative or 
quasi
 judicial in nature, that would result in the performance of duties which the members of the Supreme Court could not lawfully take it upon themselves to perform
. The present petition also furnishes an apt illustration of another anomaly, for we find the Supreme Court as a court asked to determine if the members of the court may be constituted a board of arbitrators, which is not a court at all.
The Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands represents one of the three divisions of power in our government. 
It is judicial power and judicial power only which is exercised by the Supreme Court. Just as the Supreme Court, as the guardian of constitutional rights, should not sanction usurpations by any other department of the government, so should it as strictly confine its own sphere of influence to the powers expressly or by implication conferred on it by the Organic Act.
 The Supreme Court and its members should not and cannot be required to exercise any power or to perform any trust or to assume any duty not pertaining to or connected with the administering of judicial functions. (
emphasis added
)
Imposing regulatory and supervisory functions upon the members of the Court constitutes judicial overreach by usurping and performing executive functions.
 In resolving the first issue, we are duty bound 
not to overstep
 the Court's boundaries by taking over the functions of an administrative agency. We 
should abstain from
 exercising any function which is not strictly judicial in character and is not clearly conferred on the Court by the Constitution.
[18]
 To stress, "the Supreme Court of the Philippines and its members should not and cannot be required to exercise any power or to perform any trust or to assume any duty not pertaining to or connected with the administration of judicial functions."
[19]
Do Subsection 7(e) of RA 7662 and Legal Education Board Memorandum Order No. 7, series of 2016 (LEBMO No. 7) fall within the constitutionallyÂ­ permissible supervision and regulation?
I submit that both Subsection 7(e) of RA7662 and LEBMO No. 7, series of 2016, as a minimum standard for admission to a law school, fall within the constitutionally-permissible reasonable supervision and regulation by the State over all educational institutions.
Subsection 7(e) of RA 7662 states "[f]or the purpose of achieving the objectives of this Act, the Board shall have the following powers and functions . . . (e) to prescribe minimum standards for law admission and minimum qualifications and compensation of faculty members . . . ."
On the other hand, LEBMO No. 7 imposes as an admission requirement to a law school 
passing
 (
defined as obtaining a 55% cut-off score
[20]
) the "one-Â­day aptitude test that can measure the academic potential of the examinee to pursue the study of law [by testing] communications and language proficiency, critical thinking skills, and verbal and quantitative reasoning."
[21]
 This one-day test is the Philippine Law School Admission Test (PhiLSAT).
PhiLSAT is 
offered at least once a year
,
[22]
 recently, twice a year, and an applicant can take PhiLSAT 
as many times as one would want if unsuccessful in the attempt
.
[23]
 A law school 
may prescribe
 admission requirements, but these 
must be
 in addition to passing the PhiLSAT
.
[24]
There is 
no doubt
 that Subsection 7(e) of RA7662 and LEBMO No. 7 are measures to regulate and supervise law schools. The issue: are these measures 
reasonable
?
I appreciate the 
Decision's
 ruling that the State can conduct the PhiLSAT. But I do not agree with its ruling that passing the PhiLSAT 
cannot
 be a minimum requirement for admission to a law school. 
This is a ruling that takes with its left hand, what it gives with the right.
 After stating that PhiLSAT is 
within the State's reasonable supervisory and regulatory power
 to design and provide or conduct as a minimum standard for admission to a law school, the 
Decision
 then 
disempowers
 the State of such power and authority, 
when it gave discretion to the law schools 
to ignore
 PhiLSAT completely
.
The 
Decision
 
accepts
 that PhiLSAT is a minimum standard for law school admission and is therefore 
valid
 under the State's power to regulate and supervise education in a reasonable manner. Since PhiLSAT is valid, though it may infringe a portion of a law school's academic freedom, then it cannot be set aside. It is a 
contradiction in terms
 to say that PhiLSAT is a valid regulation but that it can be ignored.
Reasonableness
 is the 
standard endorsed by the 
Constitution
. 
Reasonableness
 requires 
deference
. It is the 
stark opposite
 of the search for 
the
 correct measure
 of regulation and supervision, which means there 
can only be one proper means
 of regulating and supervising educational institutions. Where the power, however, refers to the exercise of 
reasonable
 regulation or supervision, a reviewing court 
cannot substitute
 its own appreciation of the appropriate solution; rather it 
must determine
 if the 
outcome falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law
.
[25]
Where the standard is 
reasonableness
, there 
could be more than one solution, so long as each of them is 
reasonable
. If the process and the solution fit comfortably with the principles of 
justification
 (
i.e., existence of a rational basis for the action
), 
transparency
, and 
intelligibility
 (
i.e., the adequacy of the explanation of that rational basis
), it is 
not open
 to a reviewing court 
to substitute
 its own view of the 
preferable solution
.
Conversely, where a regulation or supervision is determined to be 
unreasonable
, it means that while there 
could have been many appropriate measures
 to regulate or supervise, the 
particular regulation or supervision
 which was adopted is 
not reasonable
.
The 
existence of justification
 or whether there exists a 
rational basis
 to support the regulation, lies at the core of the definition of 
reasonableness
. The 
test of justification
 is a 
test of proportionality
.
[26]
 Accordingly:
First
, the 
objective of the regulation
 must be 
pressing and substantial
, in order 
to justify a limit on a right
. This is a threshold requirement, which is analyzed without yet considering the scope of the infringement made by the regulation, the means employed, or the effects of the measure. The integrity of the justification analysis requires that the 
objective of the regulation be properly stated
. The 
relevant objective
 is 
the very objective of the infringing measure
, 
not the objective of the broader provision upon which the regulation hinges
.
Second
, the 
means
 by which the objective is furthered 
must be proportionate
. The 
proportionality inquiry
 comprises 
three (3) components:
 (i) 
rational connection to the objective
, (ii) 
minimal impairment of the right
, and (iii) 
proportionality between the effects of the measure (a balancing of its salutary and deleterious effects)
 and the 
stated objective of the regulation
. The proportionality inquiry is both normative and contextual, and requires that a court balances the interests of society with the interests of individuals and groups.
The 
question at the first step
 of the proportionality inquiry is 
whether the measure
 that has been adopted 
is rationally connected to this objective
. This can be proved by 
evidence of the harm
 that the regulation is meant to address. In cases where such a causal connection is not scientifically measurable, 
the rational connection can be made out on the basis of reason or logic
.
The 
second component
 of the 
proportionality test requires evidence
 that 
the regulation at issue impairs the right as little as reasonably possible
. This can be shown by what the regulation seeks to achieve, what the effects of the regulation could be (
i.e., if they are overinclusive or underinclusive
) or how the regulation is tailored to respond to a specific problem.
At the 
final stage
 of the 
proportionality analysis
, it must be asked 
whether there is proportionality between the overall effects of the infringing regulation and the objective
. This involves 
weighing the salutary effects of the objectives
 
and
 
the deleterious effects of the regulation
. Are the benefits of the impugned regulation illusory and speculative? Or are these benefits real? Is it clear how the objectives are enhanced by the regulation? Are the deleterious effects on affected rights holders serious? What are these deleterious effects? What is the harm inflicted on these rights holders?
Let me deal first with Subsection 7(e) of RA 7662.
 
Existence of Justification.
 Subsection 7(e) of RA 7662 states:
(e) to prescribe minimum standards for law admission and minimum qualifications and compensation of faculty members . . . .
The 
State objectives
 in the enactment of Subsection 7(e) of RA 7662 are found in Sections 2 and 3 of the same statute:
Section 2.
 
Declaration of Policies
. - It is hereby declared the policy of the State 
to uplift the standards of legal education
 in order 
to prepare law students for advocacy, counselling, problem-solving, and decision-making, to infuse in them the ethics of the legal profession; to impress on them the importance, nobility and dignity of the legal profession as an equal and indispensable partner of the Bench in the administration of justice
 and 
to develop social competence
. Towards this end, the State shall undertake appropriate reforms in the legal education system, 
require proper selection of law students
, maintain quality among law schools, and require legal apprenticeship and continuing legal education.
Section 3.
 
General and Specific Objective of Legal Education
. - (a) Legal education in the Philippines is geared to attain the following objectives:
(1) 
to prepare students for the practice of law;
(2) 
to increase awareness among members of the legal profession of the needs of the poor, deprived and oppressed sectors of society;
(3) 
to train persons for leadership;
(4) 
to contribute towards the promotion and advancement of justice and the improvement of its administration, the legal system and legal institutions
 in the light of the historical and contemporary development of law in the Philippines and in other countries.
(b) Legal education shall aim to accomplish the following specific objectives:
(1) 
to impart among law students a broad knowledge of law and its various fields and of legal institutions;
(2) 
to enhance their legal research abilities
 to enable them to analyze, articulate and apply the law effectively, as well as to allow them to have a holistic approach to legal problems and issues;
(3) 
to prepare law students for advocacy, counselling, problem-solving and decision-making, and to develop their ability to deal with recognized legal problems of the present and the future;
(4) 
to develop competence in any field of law
 as is necessary for gainful employment or sufficient as a foundation for future training beyond the basic professional degree, and 
to develop in them the desire and capacity for continuing study and self-improvement;
(5) 
to inculcate in them the ethics and responsibilities of the legal profession;
 and
(6) 
to produce lawyers who conscientiously pursue the lofty goals of their profession and to fully adhere to its ethical norms.
 (emphasis added)
The 
objectives of Subsection 7(e)
 of RA 7662 are 
pressing and substantial
. This is because 
they arise from
, or at least 
relate to
, the objective of achieving 
quality of education 
(including of course legal education)
, which the 
Constitution
 has seen proper to elevate as a 
normative obligation
.
The foregoing objectives 
justify
 a limitation on a citizen's right to select a profession and course of study because they fall under the 
express limit
 to this right, "
subject to fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements
. " As well, the 
overarching power of the State
 to exercise reasonable supervision and regulation of all educational institutions justifies this qualification. The objectives also 
justify a limitation on the academic freedom
 of every law school as an institution of higher learning because 
quality legal education
 is a 
constitutional obligation
 of the State 
to protect
 and 
promote
.
In real terms, 
why would we not want law students
 
who have the basic abilities to communicate clearly and concisely, analyze fact situations and the legal rules that apply to them, and understand the texts assigned to them for reading and discussion
? Why should we be content with 
just
 legal education when the 
Constitution
 no less and our practical wisdom demand that 
we conjoin education with
 
quality
?
As the assailed measures prescribe 
mere
 minimum standards for law admission
 and 
minimum qualifications
 and 
compensation of faculty members
, Subsection 7(e) of RA7662 and LEBMO No. 7 are 
proportionate to
 the foregoing 
objectives
.
Minimum
 law admission
 and 
minimum
 faculty competence and compensation
 requirements are 
rationally
 connected to 
quality
 legal education and 
to each of the objectives
 mentioned in sections 2 and 3 aboveÂ­-quoted. This 
rational connection
 is 
intuitive, logical
, and 
common-sensical
. 
Prescribing these minimum standards
 can lead to and accomplish the 
objectives
 of Subsection 7(e) as they favorably affect the 
quality of students
 that a law school admits as well as the 
quality of law faculty
 who in turn 
mentors
 the students whose aptitude for law studies has been tested. In the words of Professor Bernas, paraphrasing the Constitutional Commission:
. . . . the 
duty of providing quality education entails the duty of screening those who seek education
. Necessarily too, 
the talent that is required in order to merit quality education goes up as one goes higher in the educational ladder of progression
 . . . . However, as already seen, there is also recognition of the right of school to impose admission standards. 
The state itself may also set admission standards.
[27]
Subsection 7(e) 
impairs the right of a citizen to select
 a profession and a course of study 
and
 the 
academic freedom
 of every law school only 
as little as reasonably possible
. For Subsection 7(e) prescribes only 
minimum
 standards of law admission and faculty competence and compensation.
This provision is 
not overinclusive
 or 
underinclusive
 as the 
minimum
 standards 
do not impact
 on aspects of a citizen's right to select a profession or course of study 
or
 the academic freedom of a law school 
other than
 the 
admission of students
 into a 
law degree program
 of a 
law school
.
Subsection 7(e) is tailor-fit to the objective of 
fostering law student success
 in law school and 
ensuring competent law faculty
 to teach these students.
It is 
reasonable to assume
 that 
every self-respecting law school
 would see Subsection 7(e)'s requirements of 
minimum standards for law admission
 and 
faculty compensation and competence
 as 
necessary ingredients
 of 
quality
 legal education, and that these minimum requisites would 
coincide
 with each law school's good practices in administering legal education.
At the 
final stage
 of the 
proportionality analysis
, there is 
proportionality between
 the 
overall salutary effects of the objectives of Subsection 7(e)
 and the 
deleterious impact of prescribing minimum standards for admission of students in law schools and minimum qualifications and compensation for the law faculty
.
The 
benefits
 obtained from 
achieving the objectives
 are obvious. 
No one can argue
 against students who are 
academically competent
 and have a 
personality
 ready for the rigors of legal education. It will spare both the law student and the law school of the waste of time, expense, and trauma of not being able to fit in and succeed. 
Minimum
 standards for law admission and law faculty competence and compensation are base-line 
predictors of success in law school and quality of the legal education
 it offers. Professor Bernas and the Constitutional Commission, as quoted above, shared this observation.
[28]
On the other hand, the 
deleterious effect
 of the 
imposition of such minimum standards
 is speculative
In the first place, 
petitioners offered no evidence
 of the 
oppressive
 or 
discriminatory nature
 and 
other evils
 that could be attributed to the prescription of such minimum standards. In fact, the converse is true - 
easily more than half
 of the applicants passed the first versions of PhiLSAT.
YEAR, MONTH 
PASSING RATE
2017, April
81.43%
2017, September
57.76%
2018, April
61.39%
2018, September
56.78%
2019, April
Unreleased
[29]
Accepting that 
quality
 legal education is a pressing and substantial objective, the 
screening of law students
 and the 
provision of minimum levels of competency and compensation standards for law faculty
 are logical necessary steps towards achieving this objective.
Existence of Transparency and Intelligibility.
 It cannot be denied that Subsection 7(e) of RA 7662 was 
adopted by Congress after deliberations
. These 
deliberations articulate the reasons
 behind the enactment of Subsection 7(e). The policy declaration and the list of objectives mentioned in RA 7662 also 
adequately explain
 the basis for Subsection 7(e).
Action as being within a range of possible, acceptable, and defensible outcomes.
 The 
Congress
 enacted Subsection 7 (e) as 
one of several measures
 to achieve the constitutional objective of 
quality education
, which includes 
quality legal education
. 
Prescribing minimum enforceable standards
 upon the admission of law students and the compensation and qualifications of law faculty 
is one of these courses of action
. Actually, it is 
difficult to imagine how the narrative of quality legal education
 
could not lead to
 the 
imposition of standards referred to in Subsection 7(e)
. This 
intuitive justification
 for these measures was 
not lost on the Constitutional Commission
 who believed that the duty to provide and promote 
quality education
 demanded the screening of students for base-line competencies:
[T]he 
duty of providing quality education entails the duty of screening those who seek education
. Necessarily too, 
the talent that is required in order to merit quality education goes up as one goes higher in the educational ladder of progression 
. . . . However, as already seen, there is also recognition of the right of school to impose admission standards. 
The state itself may also set admission standards.
[30]
I now apply the proportionality test to determine the reasonableness of LEBMO No. 7.
LEBMO No. 7, series of 2016, 
governs
 not only the 
mechanics
 but also the 
regulatory and supervisory aspects
 of PhiLSAT.
Like Subsection 7(e) of RA 7662, the 
general objective of PhiLSAT
 is 
to improve the quality of legal education
. LEBMO No. 7's 
particular objective
 is 
to measure the academic potential of an examinee to pursue the study of law
.
The 
means
 to these objectives is 
PhiLSAT's one-day testing of communications and language proficiency, critical thinking skills, and verbal and quantitative reasoning
.
To enforce compliance, 
admission
 to a 
law degree program
 and a 
law school
 requires or is dependent upon 
obtaining
 the 
cut-off score of 55Â°/o correct answers in PhiLSAT
.
As stated, PhiLSAT is 
offered at least once a year
,
[31]
 recently, twice a year, and an applicant can take PhiLSAT 
as many times as one would want if unsuccessful in any of the attempts
.
[32]
There is 
also a penalty for non-compliance
 by a law school, that is, if it admits students flunking the PhiLSAT.
[33]
Law schools 
may impose other admission requirements
 such as but not limited to a 
score higher than 55%
 from an examinee.
I have already established above that 
protecting and promoting quality legal education (
including legal education
) as an objective
 is 
pressing and substantial
.
Part and parcel
 of the objective of 
quality
 legal education is the 
objective
 of 
being able to screen students
 for the purpose of ascertaining their academic competencies and personal readiness to pursue legal education. As quoted above:
[T]he 
duty of providing quality education entails the duty of screening those who seek education
. Necessarily too, 
the talent that is required in order to merit quality education goes up as one goes higher in the educational ladder of progression 
. . . . However, as already seen, there is also recognition of the right of school to impose admission standards. 
The state itself may also set admission standards.
[34]
PhiLSAT as devised is 
proportionate to
 PhiLSAT's 
objectives
. The following proportionality inquiry proves this conclusion.
PhiLSAT is 
rationally connected
 to 
quality
 legal education and the 
measurement of one's academic potential
 to pursue the study of law. To repeat, "the 
duty of providing quality education entails the duty of screening those who seek education
. Necessarily too, 
the talent that is required in order to merit quality education goes up as one goes higher in the educational ladder of progression 
. . . . However, as already seen, there is also recognition of the right of school to impose admission standards. 
The state itself may also set admission standards.
"
[35]
PhiLSAT 
helps determine
 if 
an examinee has the basic skills to be able to complete successfully the law school coursework
.
It is true that PhiLSAT 
limits
 both the 
right of a citizen to select a profession and a course of study
 and the 
academic freedom of every institution of higher learning
. But it does so only 
as little as reasonably possible
.
In the first place
, the 
right of a citizen to select
 a profession and a course of study has an 
internal limitation
. The Constitution 
expressly limits this right subject to fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements
. This 
right
 therefore is 
not absolute
, and 
PhiLSAT
 as an admission requirement 
falls within the limitation to this right
.
In fact, as it 
measures only the basic competencies necessary to survive the coursework
 in a law school, PhiLSAT enhances a law school applicant's sense of dignity and self-worth as it prevents potential unmet expectations and wastage of time, resources and efforts.
If an applicant 
does not obtain a score of at least 55% in this test
 involving the 
most basic of skills required
 in a law school, despite the unlimited chances to write PhiLSAT, then 
the applicant's aptitude must lie somewhere else
.
Secondly
, it is 
inconceivable
 to think of a university program without any admission criteria whatsoever. A 
self-respecting
 law school - 
a law school that abhors being referred to as a diploma mill
 - subscribes to some 
means to measure the academic and personal readiness of its students
, and as a 
badge of honor
 and 
pride
, to 
distinguish its students from the rest
. And, if a law school can impose standards, the 
State can also do in accordance with its powers and duties under the Constitution
.
The 
impact of PhiLSAT
 on the 
right of law schools as an institution of higher learning to select their respective students
 
must be reconciled with
 the 
State's power to protect and promote quality education and to exercise reasonable supervision and regulation of all educational institutions
.
Verily, the 
impact of PhiLSAT on academic freedom
 is for sure, 
minimal
.
The analysis takes us first to 
Nos. 1
 and 
2 of LEBMO No. 7
, which state the "
Policy and Rationale
" of the "administration of a nationwide uniform law school admission test for applicants to the basic law courses in all law schools in the country." Thus:
1. Policy and Rationale. - 
To improve the quality of legal education
, all those seeking admission to the basic law courses leading to either a Bachelor of Laws or Juris Doctor degree shall be 
required to take
 the Philippine Law School Admission Test (PhiLSAT), a nationwide uniform admission test to be administered under the control and supervision of the [Legal Education Board].
2. Test Design. - The PhiLSAT shall be designed as a 
one-day aptitude test that can measure the academic potential of the examinee to pursue the study of law
. It shall 
test communications and language proficiency, critical thinking skills, and verbal and quantitative reasoning
. (
emphasis added
)
No. 1 of LEBMO No. 7
 states the 
animating purpose, 
to improve the quality of legal education
, for requiring the 
taking
 of the 
PhiLSAT
 by applicants for admission to a law school.
No. 2 of LEBMO No. 7 
provides the mechanism for achieving
 No. 1.
Nos. 7 and 9 of LEBMO No. 7
 further clarify 
how PhiLSAT would be used to measure
 the 
academic potential
 of an applicant to a law school:
7. Passing Score - The 
cut off or passing score
 for the PhilSAT shall be 
FIFTY-FIVE PERCENT (55%) correct answers
, or such percentile score as may be prescribed by the LEB.
8. Test Results - Every examinee who passed the PhilSAT shall be issued by the testing administrator a CERTIFICATE OF LEGIBILITY (COE), which shall contains the examinees test score/rating and general average to the bachelor's degree completed. Examinees who fail to meet the cut-off or passing score shall by issued a Certificate of Grade containing his/her test score/rating. The COE shall be valid for two (2) years and shall be submitted to the admitting law school by the applicant.
9. Admission Requirement - All college graduates or graduating students 
applying for admission to the basic law course
 shall be 
required to pass the PhilSAT as a requirement for admission to any law School in the Philippines
. Upon the affectivity of this memorandum order, no applicant shall be admitted for enrollment as a first year student in the basic law courses leading to a degree of either Bachelor of Laws or Juris Doctor unless he/she has passed the PhilSAT taken within 2 years before the start of studies for the basic law course and presents a valid COE as proof thereof. (
emphasis added
)
This stage of the analysis requires us to refer to 
Nos. 10 and 11 of LEBMO No. 7
:
10. Exemption. - Honor graduates granted professional civil service professional eligibility pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 907 who are enrolling within two (2) years from their college graduation are exempted from taking and passing the PhiLSAT from for purposes of admission to the basic law course.
11. Institutional Admission Requirements. - The PhiLSAT shall be without prejudice to the right of a law school in the exercise of its academic freedom to prescribe or impose 
additional
 requirements for admission, 
such as but not limited to
:
a. A score in the PhiLSAT higher than the cut-off or passing score set by the LEB;
b. Additional or supplemental admission tests to measure the competencies and/or personality of the applicant; and
c. Personal interview of the applicant (
emphasis added
)
No. 11 of LEBMO No. 7
 itself 
expressly recognizes
 the 
right of law schools
 to 
impose screening measures in addition to
 the 
taking
 or 
writing
 of 
PhiLSAT
, 
such as but not limited to
 a 
PhiLSAT score of higher than 55%, additional admission tests
, and 
personal interview
 of the 
applicant
.
The law school 
may also opt to rely solely on the result of the PhiLSAT
 in accepting students.
The 
additional requirements
 that 
a law school
 may 
impose
 would have to be 
of the same kind
 as a 
PhiLSAT score of higher than 55%, additional admission tests
, or a 
personal interview of the applicant
 - the 
defining characteristic
 of the specie in the enumeration is the 
ability to measure the competencies and/or personality of the applicant relevant to and indicative of an applicant's success in law school
 - an applicant's 
communications or language proficiency, critical thinking skills, and verbal and quantitative reasoning, and personality fit for success in law school
. So 
any screening module that makes such measurements
 could be imposed as an 
additional measure
.
On the other hand, 
No. 10 of LEBMO No. 7
 provides for an exemption from both writing and passing PhiLSAT. This, however, 
does not exempt
 an applicant from the 
other admission requirements of a law school
 if one has been imposed.
Thus, the 
scheme
 under LEBMO No. 7 can be summarized as follows:
1. 
Objective
: to measure the 
academic potential
 of an applicant to a law school to pursue a law degree 
in terms of baseline competencies
 in 
communications or language proficiency, critical thinking skills, and verbal and quantitative reasoning
.
2. 
Means:
 (a) 
writing
 the one-day aptitude test on communications or language proficiency, critical thinking skills, and verbal and quantitative reasoning, and 
passing
 this test with a score of 55% of correct answers; (b) 
non-admission
 of applicants who score less than 55% in PhiLSAT and 
imposition of administrative fine
 against law schools admitting law students who did not write or pass PhiLSAT; and (c) 
law school admission requirements in addition
 to writing and passing PhiLSAT, if any.
3. 
Exemption:
 as stated in No. 10 of LEBMO No. 7.
PhiLSAT as an admission requirement is 
reasonable
 because it is 
minimally impairing of academic freedom
.
The 
scope of the area
 measured by PhiLSAT is 
limited to academic potential
 - 
communications or language proficiency, critical thinking skills, and verbal and quantitative reasoning
 - and 
does not extend to an applicant's personality or emotional quotient
.
PhiLSAT 
competencies
 are the 
most basic of skills needed to survive as
 and 
gain something from being
, a law student. There is 
nothing fancy, whimsical
 or 
arbitrary
 about these competencies. PhiLSAT 
does not intrude
 into a law school's decision to prescribe 
other admission requirements
 covering other sets of skills.
Further, PhiLSAT's 
passing score
 is 
minimal - 55%
. If an applicant 
cannot even obtain a score of at least 55% in this test
 involving the 
most basic of skills required
 in a law school, then 
the applicant's aptitude must lie somewhere else
.
A snapshot or sample of PhiLSAT questions bears this out:
TEST A. COMMUNICATION AND LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY
  
 
Section 1. Identifying Sentence Errors
Directions: Read each sentence carefully but quickly, paying attention to the underlined word or phrase. Each sentence contains either a single error or no error at all. If the sentence contains an error, select the underlined word or phrase that must be changed to make the sentence correct. If the sentence is correct, select option D.
   
In choosing your answers, follow the requirements of standard written English.
1. 
I was paying my bill
 in a restaurant when my childhood best friend 
suddenly come
 to 
                  A                                                                                          B               
    
have a short chitchat with me
. 
No error
                        C                           D
2. Marco and Alea had been close friends for more than 
a decade
, but people who knew them
                                                                                      A
    
thought
 that 
her relationship
 was something beyond friendship. 
No error
         B                        C                                                               D
3. The manager said that John 
needed to change his ways
 because he often came late,
                                                                    A
    
failed to complete his tasks
 on time, and 
his enthusiasm was not evident
. 
No error
                         B                                                              C                        D
4. 
Most of my cousins
 wanted 
to be a teacher
, except Santino who 
wanted to be an engineer
. 
                   A                                 B                                                           C
    
No error
         D
5. 
The supervisor and me
 would always discuss if 
we need to check the items
 so that
                     A                                                                      B
    
we could avoid
 unexpected circumstances. 
No error
                C                                                    D
6. We 
believe
 that it is you who 
has
 committed a grave mistake 
for which
 a sincere apology
           A                                B                                                  C
    should be extended. 
No error
                                      D
7. While the Middle Ages 
produced
 many great writers, Dante Alighieri, the iconic author of
                                          A
    the Divine Comedy, is 
more celebrated
 than 
any writer
 from that period. 
No error
                                                B                        C                                    D
8. At the forum, the candidate said that 
he/she
 did not have 
nothing
 to offer but a promise to
                                                            A                              B
    produce more employment 
opportunities
 in the country. 
No error
                                                   C                                     D
9. 
Matthew's potential
 to be an eloquent speaker was evident in his speech which 
won
 the
               A                                                                                                     B
   admiration of not 
a few of his batchmates
. 
No error
                                               C                     D
10. A mother 
who knows
 the original value of an item can't help 
questioning
 the price of
                            A                                                                      B
     the same product when advertised 
on
 television. 
No error
                                                        C                      D
11. Some students today readily post their opinions and statuses 
on facebook
, twitter,
                                                                                                        A
     
or instagram;
 
but others, for diverse reasons
, choose to post using viber. 
No error
               B                               C                                                                  D
12. The 
voters think
 Lovely 
would have won
 the election if 
she hasn't become
 haughty.
                    A                             B                                            C
      
No error
           D
13. While attending the University, I 
used to have
 three roommates - 
one was an engineer
, 
                                                               A                                                 B
      
the second was one who wrote
 for the local dailies, and the third was a teacher. 
No error
                           C                                                                                               D
14. Two days 
before
 my father's death, he complained that he could 
not
 hardly breathe, so
                        A                                                                         B
      we 
had
 to take him to the hospital. 
No error
            C                                               D
Section 2. Sentence Completion
Directions: Choose the word or phrase that, when inserted in the sentence, best fits the meaning of the sentence as a whole.
 
23. 
Cecilia's mother _________________ from Switzerland 30 years ago, and she found a haven in the Philippines.
(A) emigrated
(B) immigrated 
(C) has emigrated
(D) has immigrated
24.
 After seeing the movie, Andrea took her eyeglasses off and put them _________________ her lap.
(A) to
(B) on
(C) in
(D) at
25. 
Contemporary Manila, with its images of urbanization and poverty, is _________________ from Old Manila, once romantically described as the Queen City of the Pacific.
(A) a far cry
(B) a grain of salt 
(C) the last straw
(D) the wrong tree
26.
 _________________ the presenter had rehearsed the, part she thought the most difficult, the pa1ticipants did not appreciate her effort and went home unhappy.
(A) Since 
(B) Because
(C) If only
(D) Even though
27. 
Yosef presented to the team _________________ than what the company purchased three years ago.
(A) a powerfuller device
(B) the powerfuller device
(C) a more powerful device
(D) the more powerful device
28. 
She was answering her assignment on historical background of a short story _________________ she discovered she was in the wrong page.
(A) after
(B) but
(C) and
(D) when
29.
 After a tight and exhausting schedule yesterday, Ramon _________________ in bed since early this morning.
(A) lay
(B) lying
(C) has lain 
(D) had lied
30. 
The passengers are informed that they have the next four hours _________________ leisure, and can go wherever they wish.
(A) at 
(B) by
(C) on
(D) as
31. 
Because the problem is rather insoluble, even those who initially wanted to take it up have now dropped it like a _________________.
(A) penny for your thoughts
(B) piece of cake
(C) spilt milk
(D) hot potato
32.
 
We are expected to _________________ our outputs on or before Thursday next week.
(A) turn to
(B) turn off
(C) turn in
(D) turn into
33. 
She was (the) _________________ among the researchers in this institution, despite her formidable credentials.
(A) humbler
(B) humblest
(C) more humble
(D) most humble
LEBMO No. 7 also 
respects the academic freedom of law schools to impose additional admission measures
 as they see fit. It is 
only this minimal requirement
 of 
writing and passing PhiLSAT at the very reasonable score of 55% on multiple choice questions that reflects an applicant's capacity for reading, writing, computing and analyzing individual questions and fact scenarios
, 
which the State demands of every law school to factor in as an admission requirement
.
More, a law school 
may admit as students
 those 
who have not written and passed PhiLSAT but have obtained professional civil service eligibility
 within two years from the date of their graduation in college.
In addition, a law school 
desirous of proving the propriety of another exemption from taking and passing PhiLSAT
 can very well 
petition the Legal Education Board
 for this purpose.
To repeat, 
While LEBMO No. 7 impacts on a law school's academic freedom, the impairment is minimal and based on rational considerations
.
As regards individual applicants to law school, the 
demand
 and 
effect
 of PhiLSAT upon them 
thoughtfully account for
 their 
dignity
 as individuals. This is because 
PhiLSAT relieves an applicant
 of the 
potential pain and agony of unmet expectations
 and 
wastage of time, resources and efforts
. Unsuccessful PhiLSAT examinees may have their aptitude in something else.
In any event, the 
scheme
 under LEBMO No. 7 
is also very accommodating
 of applicants who fail the test. PhiLSAT is now 
offered twice a year
, and an applicant 
can write it as many times
 as he or she is willing to take.
To stress anew, PhiLSAT as envisioned in LEBMO No. 7 
minimally impairs
 the limited 
right of a citizen to select a profession or a course of study
 and a 
law school's academic freedom
, is 
consistent with
 the 
State's power of reasonable regulation and supervision of all educational institutions
, and is therefore 
reasonable
.
I conclude, therefore, that there is 
proportionality
 between the 
overall salutary effects of the objectives of PhiLSAT
 and the 
deleterious effect of passing PhiLSAT
 as an admission requirement.
As in the case for Subsection 7(e), the 
benefits obtained from achieving the objectives
 are obvious - 
no one can argue against students who have been measured to have the necessary skills in communications and language, critical thinking, and verbal and quantitative reasoning
. On the other hand, the 
deleterious effect of the imposition of PhiLSAT
 to stress anew is 
speculative
. There is in fact 
no evidence of the evils
 that could be attributed to this minimal admission requirement. It 
has not been shown
 that 
PhiLSAT questions are arbitrary
, the 
test results are oppressive to the examinees (in fact, as shown above, 
easily more than half
 of the applicants have passed the first versions of PhiLSAT)
, 
or
 
the scope of PhiLSAT has occupied the
 
entire field of admission standards
 and 
has left nothing for law schools to prescribe
. These allegations 
have not been proven
 to be true.
Existence of Transparency and Intelligibility.
 PhiLSAT has had a 
long history of validation and re-validation
 that both the 
Decision
 and the 
Memorandum
 of the Office of the Solicitor General have been able to recount succinctly. The 
bases for which PhiLSAT
 was 
conceived
 and 
required
 for applicants to law school have thus been 
made transparent and intelligible
. One can therefore concede that 
PhiLSAT
 was 
not the result
 of an 
arbitrary and capricious exercise of wisdom
 by its authors.
Action as being within a range of possible, acceptable and defensible outcomes.
 It is open to the Legal Education Board to impose PhiLSAT as one of several measures to achieve the constitutional objective of 
quality education
. In fact, a 
mandatory law school admission test
 was 
one of the reform agenda to improve the quality of the instruction
 given by law schools as recommended by the Court's 
Special Study group on Bar Examination Reforms
, and later, by the 
Committee on Legal Education and Bar Matters
 and the Court's 
Bar Matter No. 1161
.
To reiterate, 
both
 Subsection 7(e) of RA 7662 and LEBMO Order No. 7 on PhiLSAT are 
reasonable
 forms of State regulation and supervision of law schools.
I also reflect on some of the 
Decision's
 ratio.
I refer to the 
presumption that the legislature intended to enact a valid, sensible and just law
 and 
one which operates no further than may be necessary to effectuate the specific purpose of the law
. In a word, Subsection 7(e) and LEBMO No. 7 are 
presumed to be reasonable
.
As 
reasonableness is a fact-heavy determination
, 
absent evidence of unreasonableness from petitioners
, it would be 
speculative to jump to the conclusion
 that 
PhiLSAT is in fact unreasonable
. Petitioners need to prove facts to disprove the presumption.
[36]
I agree that the subject of PhiLSAT is to improve the quality of legal education, which falls squarely within the scope of police power.
But I do not agree that PhiLSAT is irrelevant to such purpose and that it is further arbitrary and oppressive. In the first place, I do not share the view that there is an apparent discord between the purpose of improving legal education and prescribing a qualifying and restrictive examination because the design of the PhiLSAT itself appears to be disconnected with the aptitude for law that it seeks to measure. The discussions above should prove that PhiLSAT is 
not only relevant
 to the objectives set out by the 
Constitution
 and RA 7662 
but is also proportionate
 as a means to these objectives.
Notably, 
petitioners presented no evidence on these factual issues
. Hence, it cannot be said that the ratio in the 
Decision
 is based on facts and circumstances. There is not even a discussion in the 
Decision
 on the structure and contents of the PhiLSAT tests that have been administered thus far. To be sure, the 
absence of an evidentiary record makes the 
Decision's
 conclusions at best speculative
.
An evidentiary record is important because the 
Decision
 itself recognizes the presumption that the legislature intended to enact a valid, sensible and just law and one which operates no further than may be necessary to effectuate the specific purpose of the law. Yet, although petitioners adduced no contrary evidence, the 
Decision
 goes on to conclude that the presumption of validity has been rebutted.
If there is any 
evidence on record
 here, 
it is to the effect that LEBMO No. 7's PhiLSAT actually measures a potential law student's aptitude for law
. As the 
Decision
 itself acknowledges, the PhiLSAT is essentially an aptitude test measuring the examinee's communications and language proficiency, critical thinking, verbal and quantitative reasoning, and that it was designed to measure the academic potential of the examinee to pursue the study of law.
There is 
no denying
 that the 
ability to read a large volume of material in English
 and 
write, think and argue in English are important indicators
 of 
one's ability to complete a law degree
. While PhiLSAT is 
not an exact predictor of success
 in law school, it is its 
undeniable
 role in 
measuring a student's strong potentials for success
 that must be taken into account.
Further, as the 
Decision
 itself notes, the Court, through 
Resolution
 dated September 4, 2001, 
approved the recommendations
 of our own Committee on Legal Education and Bar Matters, including "d) to prescribe minimum standards for admission to law schools 
including a system of law aptitude examination
[.]" The Court 
could not have recommended a measure
 that would have been an unreasonable imposition on potential students of law or on academic freedom.
Some law schools are already imposing strict admission standards. That is true. 
But
 this fact does not automatically render PhiLSAT irrelevant or unreasonable.
PhiLSAT would not have come into being had there been no legitimate concerns about improving the state of our legal education.
 The top law schools are precisely top law schools 
because of strict admission standards
 they have in place.
These law schools, however, are 
not the only law schools
 in the Philippines. They do 
not have the monopoly of law students
 in the country. In fact, 
they are only a minority
. There are so many more law schools and law students out there, whose state of competencies LEBMO No. 7 seeks to capture.
It is also a contradiction in terms that we 
land the best admission standards and practices of some law schools
, 
yet reject the passing of PhiLSAT as a requirement for law school admission
. 
Their standards and practices indubitably prove a reasonable connection
 
between the regulation of admissions to legal education
 
and
 
in ensuring that those allowed to study law and eventually allowed to practice law are competent, knowledgeable or morally upright
.
But these law schools are not the reason why
 we are debating about how to improve legal education standards. If 
every
 law school has exercised responsibly their role in ensuring that admission standards and practices are up to par with quality legal education, we would not be talking about requiring PhiLSAT anymore.
The indubitable social and legislative facts prove that a screening mechanism like PhiLSAT is necessary. If we are again going the way of making such screening mechanism an optional device for law school admission, as the 
Decision
 does, 
then the Court is not just overhauling the undeniable social and legislative facts upon which Subsection 7(e) of RA 7662 was based, the 
Decision
 is also turning its back to the problems that have long beset our legal education
.
Common sense dictates
 that the 
absence of filters would clog sooner than later the pipeline of knowledge
. 
PhiLSAT acts as that filter
 which 
removes students whose capacity, values, forbearance and aptitude may not be for the study of law
. This is 
true for aspiring law students
 (there must be a State-imposed method to determine an entry level student's aptitude, capacity, forbearance and values for law study) as 
it is true for those who want to be appointed to the Bench
 (where the battery of tests administered by the JBC presumably makes not only for a fair selection process but also for a pool of competent aspirants).
I 
do not agree
 that the imposition of the PhiLSAT cut off score was made without the benefit of a prior scientific study, thereby making it arbitrary. To my mind, this is a 
reversal of the onus
 of who proves what. Since the 
Decision admits the existence of the presumption
 that the 
legislature intended to enact a valid, sensible and just law
 and one which 
operates no further than may be necessary to effectuate the specific purpose of the law
, it is 
up to the petitioners to establish
 that Congress - both the House and the Senate - and the Legal Education Board acted arbitrarily. 
Petitioners did not adduce evidence to this effect.
On the contrary, the other Branches of Government have tests validating PhiLSAT. It is 
not for these Branches of Government to explain the relevance and validity
 of these studies if, on their face, these studies appear to be relevant. The 
actions of these Branches of Government are entitled to deference
 not only because of the presumption above-mentioned but also due to their status as agents of sovereignty. Again, the 
burden is on petitioners to prove by evidence their claim
 that PhiLSAT is arbitrary for having been imposed without prior scientific study, or that petitioners' own studies disprove the presumption.
I also do not think that it is arbitrary and harsh to impose penalties upon law schools that do not make PhiLSAT a requirement for law school admission.
Again, 
petitioners have not adduced evidence
 that 
unduly oppressiveness
 will be the case. In any event, 
there is nothing oppressive about penalizing an entity that does not comply with regulations
. This setÂ­-up of regulatory and even criminal penalties 
has been done so often
 to deter violations and enforce obedience. This is especially true 
where the regulation involved is intended towards a socially positive and uplifting goal
, but 
compliance is not assured
.
In addition, 
whether to attach a penalty to a measure is a policy and not a legal decision
. The decision to impose a penalty 
speaks to the utility and wisdom or desirability
 of the manner by which breach of the regulation is deterred, and compliance, maximized.
There is, too, further 
nothing abusive about the scoring methodology
 in LEBMO No. 7. It is 
common among law schools that examinations are graded based on a minimum percentage of correct answers
 and 
not on a percentile score
. The 
Supreme Court's Bar examinations
 are 
scored on the basis of correct and wrong answers
, and 
passers are those who reach the minimum required scores
.
The ruling in 
Tablarin
[37]
 is relevant. This case law focused on the validity of the National Medical Admissions Test (NMAT) as a valid and reasonable police power measure as an admission standard into medical schools. 
Tablarin
 held that NMAT is an educational regulatory tool related to one of the legitimate objectives of police power - public order, specifically, securing of the health and physical safety and wellbeing of the population. 
Tablarin
 also recognized that though NMAT is at the most initial and lowest rung of the requisites to attain this police power objective, NMAT is nonetheless an essential part of the police power objective. 
Tablarin
 confirmed that 
NMAT serves as a gate-keeping measure to weed out misfits
 in the sense of those whose aptitude and inclinations are not for the field of medicine. The fact that NMAT was described by the Court as a factor in becoming better doctors (or medical practitioners) does not detract from the ruling in 
Tablarin
 that 
NMAT is first and foremost a legitimate screening device for those wishing to be admitted to medical schools
.
Hence, 
NMAT serves the same function as that of PhiLSAT
. Because PhiLSAT is the NMAT equivalent in essential respects, the ruling in 
Tablarin
 justifying NMAT as a legitimate police power exercise should also apply to the cases-at-bar about PhiLSAT.
PhiLSAT serves an equivalent function as the LSAT.
 LSAT is a standardised test designed to identify individuals who are likely to succeed in first year law school. 
Unlike in PhiLSAT which is a State-sponsored measure
, all law schools in North America require applicants to take LSAT. LSAT is administered by a non-profit corporation located in the United States.
LSAT, like PhiLSAT, is a screening device for entry into the great learning of the law.
 The 
theory
 behind both LSAT and PhiLSAT is that 
law schools seek students who have substantial promise for success in law school, and as a result, a strong likelihood of succeeding in the practice of law as shown by their preliminary aptitude for law
.
To be sure, we 
cannot distance or segregate law school experience from the practice of law
 because the former should ideally segue to the latter. Law schools 
do not exist exclusively just to teach law students
; law schools 
are also there to transform their students into lawyers
. It is unrealistic to say otherwise.
If law schools were to simply exist to teach 
without regard to whether their students become lawyers
, 
law school education would lose both its clientele and its relevance in the real world
 - this is the common sensical and obvious context of the educative process. Despite the division of authority as between legal education and practice of law and the obvious difference between them, in reality, 
one bridges to the other as one cannot be dissociated from the other
.
The difference between LSAT and PhiLSAT is not conceptual but operational - that is, how much weight is to be given by institutions of higher learning - the law schools - to the scores obtained by an examinee. They also differ in the scoring system - LSAT is percentile-based while PhiLSAT as now envisioned is raw score-based.
Most law schools in common law countries 
have several streams
 about how an applicant is to be admitted as a law student. The 
most common if not the only stream
 is through high LSAT scores and grade point averages. So it is a common goal for those aspiring to enter law schools in those countries to take LSAT and aim for high LSAT percentiles and GPAs.
Among these law schools, there may be other streams of admission Â­ those who have achieved extensive relevant experiences abroad or in-country and those who would bring interesting diversity to the law school student population. 
But the number of these students vis-a-vis the entire population of law students in a law school is miniscule.
 The students admitted through these other streams 
constitute a very small minority
 of the entire population of law students.
The majority are still required to show competence through LSAT scores.
 The 
lower scores an applicant has
, the 
lower the chance the applicant can get to enroll in a law school
 - IF THEY HAVE ANY CHANCE AT ALL.
In any event, LSAT is not anchored on a State sponsored measure. Why the countries under LSAT regimes do not require State supervision and regulation could be attributed to their perception that their law societies (the equivalent of our Integrated Bar) and law schools are mature enough to selfÂ­ regulate.
If we had no concerns about law schools which have no proportionate standards to the nobility of legal education, then perhaps we can adopt as liberal a policy as the countries utilizing LSAT and having different admission streams. But obviously, our experiences are not the same as their experiences; our situation is not similar to their situations.
In any case, 
PhiLSAT tries to mirror the admission practices
 where LSAT is the screening device. If LSAT 
can be waived in exceptional circumstances, this exceptional stream where LSAT is waived
 
is akin
, in the case of PhiLSAT, to recall from above, 
to the 
exemption under No. 10 of LEBMO No. 7 for honor graduates
.
PhiLSAT as embodied in LEBMO No. 7 is not objectionable for being unreasonable. Having been imposed by a law that carries the presumption of validity and reasonableness that has not been disproven by contrary evidence from petitioners' end, PhiLSAT cannot be ignored or set aside as this has been imposed by the State through an administrative regulation-LEBMO No. 7 - which finds its basis in RA 7662.
I agree with the 
Decision
 that the reasonable supervision and regulation clause is not a stand-alone provision but must be read in conjunction with the other constitutional provisions which include, in particular, the clause on academic freedom. I agree as well that institutions of higher learning has a wide sphere of autonomy certainly extending to the choice of students.
Yet, this sphere of autonomy is not absolute or limitless.
 Autonomy cannot result in arbitrary or discriminatory admission policies. If autonomy were to have such a result, restrictive police power can curb such actuality or tendency. 
Autonomy too cannot disregard the constitutional power of the State to exercise reasonable regulation and supervision of all educational institutions.
 Thus, I agree with the 
Decision
 that affirmative police power can be legitimately exercised in the regulation and supervision of institutions of higher learning. The 
Decision
 aptly ruled that institutions of higher learning enjoy ample discretion to decide for itself who to admit, being part of their academic freedom, but the State, in the exercise of its reasonable supervision and regulation over education, can impose minimum regulations. 
This is what RA 7662 and LEBMO No. 7 have done.
The 
issue is not
 whether the State can intervene in the admission requirements of law schools or any other institution of higher learning - 
the rule of law has already said 
the State can
. The issue is whether the degree and breadth of the intervention that the State can legally do is reasonable supervision and regulation
.
In this light, I do not agree that the PhiLSAT cut off score is a direct intrusion into the law school's essential freedom to choose 
who may be admitted to study
. I maintain that PhiLSAT plays a viable and vital role in determining an entry law student's aptitude for law. The ability to read a large volume of materials in English and write in English are important indicators of the ability to complete a law degree. Again, while the PhiLSAT is not an exact predictor of success in law school, it is a factor that must be taken into account.
For the reasons I have stated, I 
disagree with the 
Decision
 that in mandating that only students who scored at least 55% correct answers shall be admitted to any law school, PhiLSAT usurps the right and duty of the law school to determine for itself the criteria for the admission of students and thereafter, to apply such criteria on a case to case basis. 
There is a way to read reason into LEBMO Order No. 7 that is neither strained nor unwarranted.
 I have shown this in the foregoing disquisition.
Another. 
I disagree with the 
Decision
 that the law schools are left with absolutely no discretion to choose its students in accordance with its own policies, but are dictated to surrender such discretion in favor of a State-Â­determined pool of applicants. 
This is a hyperbole that finds no basis in fact and law.
 It is 
highly speculative
 that the 
complexion of the student body
 and the 
number of students
 a 
law school admits will be different
 just because PhiLSAT was put in place. There is no evidence of that in the records. In any case, 
the State is also a stakeholder in our educational institutions. The State cannot lightly be disregarded when it comes to reasonable minimal regulation and supervision
.
I therefore do not concur with the ruling that the requirement of passing the PhiLSAT insofar as admission to law school is concerned should be struck down not only for being unreasonable but also for encroaching upon the law school's exercise of discretion as to who to admit in its law program.
In practical terms, PhiLSAT is the default means by which one could become a law student. Hence, one desirous of becoming a law student would want to take and pass PhiLSAT. If he or she fails the first time, he or she can. try again and again and again. Then perhaps if one still fails PhiLSAT, legal education is not for his or her aptitude. It is not of course the end of the world. It is the door that opens to other fitting opportunities for self-improvement if not self-aggrandizement.
Accordingly, I vote to affirm the constitutionality in full of Subsection 7(e) and LEBMO Order No. 7, series of 2016.
Are Subsections 7(g) and (h) of RA 7662 
ultra vires
 for encroaching into the constitutional powers of the Supreme Court.
These provisions read:
(g) to establish a law practice internship as a requirement for taking the Bar which a law student shall undergo with any duly accredited private or public law office or firm or legal assistance group anytime during the law course for a specific period that the Board may decide, but not to exceed a total of twelve (12) months. For this purpose, the Board shall prescribe the necessary guidelines for such accreditation and the specifications of such internship which shall include the actual work of a new member of the Bar.
(h) to adopt a system of continuing legal education. For this purpose, the Board may provide for the mandatory attendance of practicing lawyers in such courses and for such duration as the Board may deem necessary.
We can opt to read these provisions 
niggardly or reasonably
, the 
first
 resulting in an obvious conflict with the Supreme Court's jurisdiction over the practice or procedure before our courts and other decision-making bodies and over members of the Bar, while the 
second
 seeks a middle way that does not strain the wording of these provisions.
[38]
 
I opt to read these provisions with respect and deference to the legislative intent not to violate the constitutional powers of the Supreme Court.
 This is 
consistent with enshrined principles of statutory construction.
A rule of statutory construction 
long cherished
 by the Court is that 
law should not be construed as to allow the doing of an act which is prohibited by law
, and that a 
statute should be construed whenever possible in a manner that will avoid conflict with the Constitution
.
[39]
Each part or section of a rule should be construed in connection with every other part or section as to produce a harmonious whole.
[40]
More
, the "
meaning of a word or a phrase used in a statute is qualified by the purpose which induced the legislature to enact the statute. In construing a word or phrase, the court should adopt that interpretation that accords best with the manifest purpose of the statute or promotes or realizes its object
."
[41]
A "
statute must always be construed as a whole, and the particular meaning to be attached to any word or phrase is usually to be ascertained from the context, the nature of the subject treated and the purpose or intention of the body which enacted or framed the statute
."
[42]
 In other words, the rule's purpose or context must be the controlling guide in interpreting every provision thereof.
[43]
Accordingly, I read Subsections 7(g) and (h) with the caveat that the Legal Education Board's exercise of power over these matters is neither final, direct, primary nor exclusive for the simple reason that the subject-matters of Subsections 7(g) and (h) are 
no longer about promoting the quality of legal education
.
Law practice internship or articling as it is called elsewhere 
already involves the practice of law
. 
It calls for putting one's legal education to apply to real life situations. Continuing legal education covers lawyers, not law students.
 It is 
part and parcel of ensuring a lawyer's competence
, 
not
 a 
law student's aptitude for legal education
. Clearly, 
the Legal Education Board cannot decide on these matters primarily, directly, and much less, exclusively
.
Subsections
 7(g) and (h) 
so as not to render them unconstitutional or illegal
, must be 
read consistent with the objective of RA 7662:
 is 
to focus on enhancing the quality of legal education
, and these provisions 
cannot be given effect beyond that objective
.
Here, the Legal Education Board 
may establish a law practice internship or adopt a continuing legal education program
 for lawyers, 
as any service provider can
, 
but these programs must be consistent with the rules already promulgated and vetted by the Court
.
In other words, the 
law practice internship would have to be vetted and sanctioned by the Supreme Court - nothing of this sort moves without the imprimatur of the Court
. This requirement of 
Supreme Court regulation and control
 is 
deemed written
 into Subsection 7(g). This arises from the rule that 
statutes and regulations are inferior to the Constitution, and that statutes and regulations are presumed to have been intended to be valid
 and thus 
must be read in a way that upholds the Constitution
.
Continuing legal education may also be provided by the Legal Education Board as a service provider.
 It 
may
 
innovate means
 
to serve
 the Supreme Court's mandatory continuing legal education program. But like the law practice internship, the 
continuing legal education program the Legal Education Board will have to be vetted and sanctioned by the Court
. As in the case of Subsection 7(g), the requirement of vetting and sanctioning by the Court is 
deemed written
 into Subsection 7(h) of RA 7662.
As a result, I vote to affirm the constitutionality of Subsections 7 (g) and (h) of RA 7662.
CONCLUSION
With due respect to the majority, the dispositive portion of the Decision is quite ambivalent, and if I may so, engages in circular reasoning. It reads in part:
The Court further declares: 
As 
CONSTITUTIONAL
:
Section 7(c) of R.A. No. 7662 insofar as it gives the Legal Education Board the power to set the standards of accreditation for law schools taking into account, among others, the qualifications of the members of the faculty without encroaching upon the academic freedom of institutions. of higher learning; and
Section 7(e) of R.A. No. 7662 insofar as it gives the Legal Education Board the power to prescribe the minimum requirements for admission to legal education and minimum qualifications of faculty members without encroaching upon the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning.
Pray tell, what can the LEB do now without encroaching on the academic freedom of law schools - if it is unconstitutional for LEB to require a qualifying examination such as PhiLSAT, when LEB can only recommend but not impose? Where does the exercise of regulation and supervision in this kind of ruling come in? Truly, the 
Decision
 takes with its left hand what it gives with its right. We are back to square one.
[1]
 A to Z 
Quotes
 at 
https://www.azquotes.com/quotes/topics/competencies.html
 (last accessed July 23, 2019), attributed to Michelle Bachmann.
[2]
 A to Z 
Quotes
 at 
https://www.azquotes.com/quotes/topics/competencies.html
 (last accessed July 23, 2019), attributed to Peter Drucker.
[3]
 Quoted with permission, name of school, teacher, and student purposely withheld.
[4]
 
Council of Teachers and Staff of Colleges and Universities of the Philippines v. Secretary of Education
, G.R No. 216930, October 9, 2018.
[5]
 Ibid.
[6]
 Joaquin G. Bernas, S.J., THE 1987 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES: A COMMENTARY (2003) at 1228, 1256, citing IV RECORD 258-260, 414-418.
[7]
 
Council of Teachers and Staff of Colleges and Universities of the Philippines
, Supra note 4.
[8]
 Id. at 1251-1252.
[9]
 G.R. No. L-40779, November 28, 1975.
[10]
 Joaquin G. Bernas, S.J., THE 1987 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES: A COMMENTARY (2003) at 1228, citing IV RECORD 258-260.
[11]
 G.R. No. 78164, July 31, 1987.
[12]
 The Subsection read: "(e) to prescribe minimum standards for law admission and minimum qualifications and compensation of faculty members . . . ."
[13]
 The Subsections read: "(g) to establish a law practice internship as a requirement for taking the Bar which a law student shall undergo with any duly accredited private or public law office or firm or legal assistance group anytime during the law course for a specific period that the Board may decide, but not to exceed a total of twelve (12) months. For this purpose, the Board shall prescribe the necessary guidelines for such accreditation and the specifications of such internship which shall include the actual work of a new member of the Bar.(h) to adopt a system of continuing legal education. For this purpose, the Board may provide for the mandatory attendance of practicing lawyers in such courses and for such duration as the Board may deem necessary."
[14]
 Rules of Court, Rule 138, Secs. 2, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18 and 19.
[15]
 The provision reads: "The Members of the Supreme Court and of other courts established by law shall not be designated to any agency performing quasi-judicial or administrative functions."
[16]
 In Re: Designation of Judge Manzano as Member of the Ilocos Norte Provincial Committee on Justice, 248 Phil. 487 (1988).
[17]
 57 Phil. 600 (1932).
[18]
 Manila Electric Co. v. Pasay Transportation Co., 
Id.
[19]
 Noblejas v. Teehankee, 131 Phil. 931 (1968).
[20]
 Nos. 7 and 9, LEBMO No. 7.
[21]
 No. 2, LEBMO No. 7.
[22]
 No. 5, LEBMO No. 7.
[23]
 No. 3, LEBMO No. 7.
[24]
 No. 11, LEBMO No. 7.
[25]
 Manila Memorial Park Inc. v. Secretary of the Department of Social Welfare and Development, G.R. No. 175356. December 3, 2013: 
Because all laws enjoy the presumption of constitutionality, 
courts will uphold a law's validity if any set of facts may be conceived to sustain it
. On its face, we find that there are at least two conceivable bases to sustain the subject regulation's validity
 absent clear and convincing proof that it is unreasonable, oppressive or confiscatory. 
Congress may have legitimately concluded that business establishments have the capacity to absorb a decrease in profits or income/gross sales
 due to the 20% discount without substantially affecting the reasonable rate of return on their investments considering (1) not all customers of a business establishment are senior citizens and (2) the level of its profit margins on goods and services offered to the general public. Concurrently, 
Congress may have, likewise, legitimately concluded that the establishments
, which will be required to extend the 20% discount, 
have the capacity to revise their pricing strategy so that whatever reduction in profits or income/gross sales that they may sustain
 because of sales to senior citizens, can be recouped through higher mark-ups or from other products not subject of discounts. 
As a result, the discounts resulting from sales to senior citizens will not be confiscatory or unduly oppressive.
 (
emphasis added
).
[26]
 Ichong v. Hernandez, 101 Phil. 1155 (1957).
[27]
 Joaquin G. Bernas, S.J., THE 1987 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES: A COMMENTARY (2003) at 1228, 1256, citing IV RECORD 258-260, 414-418.
[28]
 Joaquin G. Bernas, S.J., THE 1987 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES: A COMMENTARY (2003) at 1228, 1256, citing IV RECORD 258-260, 414-418.
[29]
 The list of names of passers for the April 2019 PhiLSAT exam has been released. However, the passing rate has not been released by either the official PhiLSAT website or any other media outlet, article, or post.
[30]
 Joaquin G. Bernas, S.J., THE 1987 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES: A COMMENTARY (2003) at 1228, 1256, citing IV RECORD 258-260, 414-418.
[31]
 No. 5, LEBMO No. 7.
[32]
 No. 3, LEBMO No. 7.
[33]
 No. 15, LEBMO No. 7.
[34]
 Joaquin G. Bernas, S.J., THE 1987 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES: A COMMENTARY (2003) at 1228, 1256, citing IV RECORD 258-260, 414-418.
[35]
 Joaquin G. Bernas, S.J., THE 1987 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES: A COMMENTARY (2003) at 1228, 1256, citing IV RECORD 258-260, 414-418.
[36]
 Ermita-Malate Motel and Hotel Operators Association Inc. v. City Mayor of Manila, G.R. No. L-24693, July 31, 1967: "
Primarily what calls for a reversal of such a decision is the absence of any evidence to offset the presumption of validity that attaches to a challenged statute or ordinance
. As was expressed categorically by Justice Malcolm: "The presumption is all in favor of validity . . . The action of the elected representatives of the people cannot be lightly set aside . . . ." It admits of no doubt therefore that there being a presumption of validity, the necessity for evidence to rebut it is unavoidable, unless the statute or ordinance is void on its face, which is not the case here. The principle has been nowhere better expressed than in the leading case of O'Gorman & Young v. Hartford Fire Insurance Co., where the American Supreme Court through Justice Brandeis tersely and succinctly summed up the matter thus: 'The statute here questioned deals with a subject clearly within the scope of the police power. We are asked to declare it void on the ground that the specific method of regulation prescribed is unreasonable and hence deprives the plaintiff of due process of law. As underlying questions of fact may condition the constitutionality of legislation of this character, the presumption of constitutionality must prevail in the absence of some factual foundation of record for overthrowing the statute.' 
No such factual foundation being laid in the present case, the lower court deciding the matter on the pleadings and the stipulation of facts, the presumption of validity must prevail and the judgment against the ordinance set aside.
" (emphasis added)
[37]
 236 Phil. 768, (1987).
[38]
 Uy Ha v. City Mayor of Manila, 108 Phil. 400 (1960): "A law should not be construed as to allow the doing of an act which is prohibited by law." Philippine long Distance Co. v. Collector of Internal Revenue, 90 Phil. 674 (1952): ". . . a statute should be construed whenever possible in a manner that will avoid conflict with the Constitution."
[39]
 Uy Ha v. City Mayor of Manila, 108 Phil. 400 (1960): "A law should not be construed as to allow the doing of an act which is prohibited by law;" Philippine long Distance Co. v. Collector of Internal Revenue, 90 Phil. 674 (1952): ". . . a statute should be construed whenever possible in a manner that will avoid conflict with the Constitution."
[40]
 Ruben E. Agpalo, STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION (1995) 196-197, citing Tamayo v. Gsell, 35 Phil. 953 (1916).
[41]
 Ruben E. Agpalo, STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION (1995) 148, Supra note 40, citing Luzon Stevedoring Co. v. Natividad, 43 Phil. 803 (1922), Molina v. Rafferty, 38 Phil. 167 (1918).
[42]
 Ruben E. Agpalo, STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION (1995) 198, Supra note 40, citing Sotto v. Sotto, 43 Phil. 688 (1922), Araneta v. Concepcion, 99 Phil. 709 (1956).
[43]
 Ruben E. Agpalo, STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION (1995) 198, Supra note 40.




 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)