E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			351 Phil. 858
			




THIRD DIVISION


[ G.R. No. 118972, April 03, 1998 ]


HOME DEVELOPMENT MUTUAL FUND AND MARILOU ADEA-PROTOR, PETITIONERS,
VS. COURT OF APPEALS AND DR. CORA J. VIRATA (CONVIR) AND ASSOCIATES,
INC., RESPONDENTS.

D E C I S I O N




PURISIMA, J.:


At bench is  a petition
for review on 
certiorari 
under Rule 45 of the Revised Rules of Court, to
review and set aside the Decision of the Court of Appeals
[1]
 dated  June 30, 1994  in  CA-GR No.  35240, affirming with modification the Decision dated  March 22, 1991 in Civil Case No. 12715 of
Branch 145,
[2]
 Regional Trial Court of Makati City.


The antecedent facts that matter can be culled, as follows:


On January 1, 1985, CONVIR and Associates, Inc., represented by its
President, Dra. Cora J. Virata, and the petitioner, Home Development Mutual
Fund (
HDMF
), represented by its Senior Vice-President, Vicente Reventar
III, entered into a CONSULTANCY AGREEMENT by virtue of which the former
obligated itself to render medical services to the employees of HDMF.  The said service contract stipulated,  among others:


“That this AGREEMENT takes effect on  January 1, 1985 up to December 31, 1985, provided however,
that either party who desires to terminate the contract may serve the other
party a written notice at least thirty (30) days in advance.”


On December 16, 1985,  Dra.
Cora J. Virata wrote  petitioner Marilou
O. Adea-Proctor,  then Deputy Chief
Executive Officer and Officer-in-Charge of HDMF, to inform that she (
Dra.
Cora J. Virata
) was assuming from their (
petitioners’
) silence that
subject Agreement was 
renewed
 for the succeeding period, from January 1,
1986 to December 31, 1986.
[3]


In her Reply-letter, dated December 23, 1985, petitioner
Adea-Proctor notified  Dra. Cora J.
Virata of the termination of the contract in question upon its expiration on
December 31, 1985; informing Dra. Virata of the appointment by management  of a full-time physician to the vacant
plantilla position, such that  her
services would not be needed anymore.
[4]
 But such letter-reply was
formally and actually received by the private respondents only on January 9,
1986.


In the Complaint filed on January 15, 1986, private respondents
averred that petitioners’ sudden and unexpected termination of the Consultancy
Agreement, which requires a written notice thirty (
30
) days in advance,
did not conform  therewith.
Consequently, private respondents prayed for unrealized income of at least Five
Hundred Thousand (
P
500,000.00
) Pesos resulting from loss of
business opportunities, Four Hundred Thousand (
P
400,000.00
)
Pesos, as exemplary damages, One Hundred Thousand (
P
100,000.00) Pesos,
as litigation expenses, and 25% of the total amount, as attorney’s fees.


In their  Answers sent in
on  January 14, 1986, petitioners
Adea-Proctor and HDMF sought the dismissal of the Complaint; contending 
inter
alia
 that the Complaint states no cause of action arising from the
termination  of the contract,  upon expiration of the agreed period.  They argued that private respondents’
insistence on the necessity of a notice of renewal of the contract is
predicated on an erroneous interpretation of its terms,  conditions and duration  which are clear.


On March 22, 1991, the trial  court of origin came out with a decision; disposing, as follows:


“Wherefore, premises considered, judgment is hereby rendered,
ordering defendant Home Development Mutual Fund, to pay plaintiff the sum of
Fifty Thousand (
P
50,000.00) Pesos, in Philippine Currency, as
compensatory damages; and Twenty Thousand (
P
20,000.00) Pesos, Philippine
Currency, as and by way of attorney’s fees, and the costs.


Defendant’s counterclaims are dismissed/ denied for lack of
merit.


SO ORDERED.”
 


On appeal, the aforesaid judgment was affirmed with modification
by the Court of Appeals, deleting the award of compensatory damages for want of
sufficient evidence to support the same.  With the denial of their motion for reconsideration,  petitioners  found  their  way  to  this Court via  the present Petition;  theorizing,  that:


I.  THE PUBLIC RESPONDENT ERRED WHEN IT RULED TO
THE EFFECT THAT BECAUSE OF THE RENEWAL OF THE CONSULTANCY AGREEMENT SINCE 1981,
THE 1985 CONSULTANCY AGREEMENT IS DEEMED RENEWED FOR ANOTHER TERM UNLESS
ADVANCED NOTICE OF TERMINATION/NON-RENEWAL IS SERVED BY EITHER PARTY TO THE
OTHER;


II.  THE PUBLIC RESPONDENT ERRED WHEN IT RULED
THAT THE MEDICAL SERVICES OF APPELLEE WAS UNREASONABLY TERMINATED/ NOT RENEWED
BECAUSE THE LETTER OF TERMINATION/NON-RENEWAL “WAS SERVED OR MAILED SO CLOSE TO
THE END OF THE YEAR...;”


III. THE PUBLIC
RESPONDENT ERRED IN HOLDING PETITIONER LIABLE FOR ATTORNEY’S FEES TO THE
APPELLEE UNDER ART. 19 OF THE NEW CIVIL CODE.


The petition is not impressed  with merit.


Our  pivot of inquiry  is the correct construction or
interpretation  of subject Consultancy
Agreement, particularly its  provision:


“That this agreement  takes  effect  on  January 1, 1985 to December 31, 1985;  Provided, however, that either party who desires to terminate the
contract may  serve the other party  a  written  notice  at  least  thirty  (30) days in advance.”


The first clause of the aforecited stipulation, which is the bone
of petitioners’ stance, basically deals with the 
term of the contract; 
while
the proviso, which is the core of private respondents’ action,  prescribes the 
manner 
  the service contract in question could be
terminated.


It is petitioners’ submission that the first clause referred to
is independent, distinct and separate from the said proviso, such that upon the
expiration of the period  stated in the
first clause, the Consultancy Agreement ceased to have any  binding effect between the contracting
parties even though they (
petitioners
) did not give any written notice
of termination at least thirty (
30
) days in advance. 


We cannot fathom  how  contracting  parties, who are 
sui juris
, and knowledgeable of the purposes for
which they solemnly put  their Agreement
into writing, could be so careless as to include  inconsistent conditions in such a short and simple provision in
their contract sued upon.


Time-honored is the rule that “In  the construction of an instrument where there are several
provisions or particulars, such a construction is, if possible, to be adopted
as will give effect to 
all.”
[5]
 
Article 1374 of the New Civil Code, on the other hand, requires that
“The various stipulations of a contract shall be interpreted 
together, 
attributing
to the doubtful ones that sense which may result from all of them taken 
jointly.
”
 
Conformably, to  ascertain the true meaning or import of the
controverted provision of subject Consultancy Agreement, its 
entirety 
 
 
must be considered; not merely the first clause.
[6]
 Consequently, petitioners’ interpretation
solely based on the first clause, and which completely ignored the second
clause under scrutiny,  cannot be
upheld. 


The law mandates that “Obligations arising from contracts have
the force of 
law 
between the contracting parties and should be
complied with in good faith.”
[7]


Did petitioners comply with their contractual obligation in good
faith, when they served the requisite written notice to private respondents
nine 
(9) 
days after the expiration of the Agreement?  The answer to this crucial question is in
the  negative.


The second clause of the contractual provision in dispute is to
the effect that written notice of termination should be served at least
thirty  (
30
) days in advance.  As a  rule, the 
method 
of terminating a  contract is primarily determined by the stipulation of the
parties.
[8]
 Thus, the requirements of contracts as to 
notice

-
 as to the 
time of
giving, form
, and  
manner of
service 
thereof 
-
 must be
strictly observed because “In an obligation where a period is designated, it is
presumed to have been established for the benefit of both the contracting
parties.”
[9]
 Thus, the unilateral termination of the contract
in question by the herein petitioners is  violative of the 
principle of mutuality of  contracts 
ordained in Art. 1308 of
the New Civil Code.
[10]


Petitioner Adea-Proctor contends that on December 26, 1985, she
caused personal delivery of her letter-reply dated December 23, 1985, addressed
to private respondent Dra. Cora Virata, informing the latter of  the impending expiration of the contract
which would not be renewed anymore because the petitioners planned to fill up
the vacant plantilla position with a full-time physician, as approved by the
Board of Trustees of HDMF.
[11]
 However, petitioner Adea-Proctor claims that
when the said letter was delivered by one Ramon Ortega, petitioners’ messenger,
to the Makati office of  private
respondents, the latter’s representative, a certain Rose Sy, refused to
receive  it.  So, petitioner Adea-Proctor had to send the said letter by
registered mail,  on the same day, and
private respondents received it  on January
9, 1986.


We are  not persuaded
by  petitioners’ stance.   From the  evidence on hand, it can be unerringly gleaned that within the first
week of January, 1986, respondent Dra. Cora J. Virata was allowed by
petitioners to assume her duties as physician of petitioners’ employees.  As ratiocinated by the  Court of Appeals:


“For one thing, if it were true that appellant (petitioner HDMF)
was decided in not renewing the consultancy agreement with appellee (private
respondent Cora Virata), it should have instructed and informed all its
employees not to avail anymore of appellee’s medical services.  As it was, appellant allowed  its  employees  to  still  avail  of  appellee’s medical services on the
 first
week of January, 1986.”
[12]


Granting 
ex
 
gratia
 
argumenti
 that  petitioners caused personal delivery of
their letter-reply on December 26, 1985, we believe that the same could not be
deemed a substantial compliance with their contractual obligation because  it was done just five (5) days prior to the
expiration of the contract.  To
repeat,  what is  stipulated is thirty (30) days in advance.  As the trial court stressed:


“Necessarily, such notice of termination or non-renewal must be
served within reasonable time, in fairness to the other party.  Under the circumstances obtaining, however,
the defendants’ (petitioners herein) notice on plaintiff (private respondent
herein) was unreasonable, particularly as it was served or mailed so close to
the end of the year and at the height of the Christmas holidays, factors which
were unduly disadvantageous to plaintiff as it leaves no sufficient opportunity
to prepare for the closure of the business with other potential clients, to the
detriment of said plaintiff.”
[13]


Indeed, private respondents had every reason to assume that  subject service contract  was deemed renewed.  As found by the Court of Appeals:


“The evidence shows in this case that since 1981, appellee’s
(private respondent herein) consultancy agreement with appellant (petitioners
herein) had been renewed, without renegotiation, so that appellee as a practice
would continue her services to appellant even after expiry date of the
contract.


These implied renewals of the contract had been going on as a
practice of both appellant and appellee since 1981, so that at the start of
each year, appellee would just the same, perform her duties as appellant’s
physician, with contract to be signed in the first few months of the year.  As this was the practice, appellee could not
be blamed for performing her professional duties as appellant’s physician even
in the absence of a contract.” (CA Decision, p. 5)


Premises studiedly considered, we are of the irresistible
conclusion  that  the Court of Appeals erred not in adjudging
as renewed  the Consultancy Agreement
litigated upon.


In the second assigned error, petitioners theorize that the  Court of Appeals  erred  in  ruling  that  the  medical  services  of  private respondents were unreasonably
terminated because the December 26, 1985 letter of termination “was served or
mailed so close to the end of the year...”


We discern nothing reversible in such conclusion arrived at by
public respondent. Ordinarily, what is reasonable time under the circumstances
of a particular case is a  mixed
question of law and of fact, for determination by  the trier of facts.  This
Court is not a trier of facts. Furthermore, well settled is the doctrine that
“the findings of fact by the trial court are accorded great respect by
appellate courts and should not be disturbed on appeal unless the trial court
has overlooked, ignored, or disregarded some fact or circumstances of
sufficient weight or significance which, if considered, would alter the
situation.”
[14]
 The facts of the case, as stated by the
trial court, were adopted by the Court of Appeals.  And a conscientious sifting of the records fails to bring to
light any fact or circumstance militative against the correctness of the
said  findings of  the trial court and the Court of Appeals.


We are likewise in agreement with the Court of Appeals’ finding
that petitioners acted in bad faith for refusing to comply with  private  respondents’ valid demand.  Therefore, it is just and equitable  that attorney’s fees  be
recovered,
[15]
 in the reasonable amount fixed below.


WHEREFORE
, the  Decision of the Court of Appeals in C.A. - G.R. No. 35240 is hereby  AFFIRMED
 
in toto
.  No pronouncement as to costs.


SO ORDERED.


Narvasa, C.J., (Chairman), Romero, 
and
 Kapunan, JJ., 
concur
.












[1]
 
Seventeenth
Division, composed of Associate Justices Lourdes Tayao-Jaguros (ponente), Jesus
M. Elbinias (Chairman), and Bernardo Ll. Salas.






[2]
 
Presided by Judge
Job B. Madayag.






[3]
 Annex
“C”of the Complaint, p. 12, Record.






[4]
 
Annex “D” of the
Complaint, p. 14, Record.






[5]
 
Section 11,
Rule  130 of the Rules of Court.






[6]
 
See Rutz 
vs
.
Sheriff of Manila, 34 SCRA 203.






[7]
 
Article 1159,
New  Civil Code; Philam 
vs
. Mutuc
61 SCRA 22.






[8]
 
Baluran 
vs
.
Navarro, 79 SCRA 309.






[9]
 
Article 1196,
New  Civil Code.






[10]
 
Spouses Mariano and
Gilda Florendo 
vs
. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 101771, December 17, 1996.






[11]
 
Petition for Review,
pp. 2-3.






[12]
 
CA Decision, p. 6.






[13]
 
RTC Decision, pp.
2-3.






[14]
 
People 
vs
.
Dizon G.R. No. 120957, August 22, 1996; People 
vs
. Gomez, 229 SCRA 138.






[15]
 
Article 2208, pr. 5
and 11, New  Civil Code.








 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)