E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			353 Phil. 419
			




SECOND DIVISION


[ G.R. No. 117453, June 26, 1998 ]


AUTOBUS WORKERS’ UNION (AWU) AND RICARDO ESCANLAR, PETITIONERS, VS. NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS COMMISSION AND MR. ROBERT ONG, RESPONDENTS. 
D E C I S I O N




MARTINEZ, J.:


This petition for certiorari and prohibition assails the Resolution
 dated July 12, 1994 of the respondent National Labor Relations 
Commission which affirmed the decision of the Labor Arbiter, the 
dispositive portion of which reads:      
  


CONFORMABLY WITH THE FOREGOING, judgment is hereby rendered 
finding complainant’s dismissal valid and in accordance with procedural 
due process. 


As financial assistance, however, respondents are hereby ordered to give complainant the sum of P5,000.00.      


SO ORDERED.”
[1]
 




and the Resolution dated October 3, 1994 denying the motion for reconsideration of petitioner.      


Petitioner Ricardo E. Escanlar worked with Autobus Industries, Inc.
 (Autobus for brevity) as a Cutting Machine Operator since January 8, 
1981 with a salary of P162.16 per day. He was the recipient of two (2) 
Plaques of Appreciation as Model Employee in 1987 and as Valuable 
Employee in 1988. He was later elected President of the Autobus Workers’
 Union (AWU), the union for the rank and file employees.      


On January 29, 1993, Engr. Zosimo Prospero Chavez, Production Manager of Autobus, received a handwritten report
[2]
 from one Reynaldo T. Andres, a supervisor, pertinent portions of which are quoted hereunder: 




“1. That in the morning of January 29, 1993, Mr. Andres told the 
herein complainant, together with another employee of the company their 
reassignment to the other section of the company as these latter 
sections lack manpower; that herein complainant shall be reassigned to 
the `Washer Section’ while the other to the `Painting Section’;


“2. That despite being told of the reason for his transfer, Mr. Escanlar questioned his transfer to the `Washer Section’;


“3. That on the way to his assigned section, herein complainant 
asked for an eye goggle to be used in his work; that a certain Mr. 
Andres told complainant that there was one goggle in the section where 
he is assigned;


“4. That herein complainant refused to use the goggles saying 
that it might have some `ketong’ in it; that no new goggles were issued 
to the complainant; that the latter was given instructions by Mr. 
Andres; that Mr. Andres proceeded to the `Painting Section’;


“5. That at around 6:55 a.m. while on his way back to the `Washer
 Section,’ Mr. Andres saw herein complainant talking to a certain Odelon
 Gamora; that the two talked for about two (2) minutes; that after their
 conversation, Mr. Andres approached the complainant; that at this 
instance Mr. Escanlar told Mr. Andres that he (complainant) did not like
 the way Mr. Andres chose personnel to go on overtime; that complainant 
went on further saying that Mr. Andres chose only persons who are close 
to him and from those who treat him for a drink; that Mr. Andres told 
complainant to ask a certain Mr. Tomas Marahit who was near if the 
complainant’s allegations were true;


“6. That thereafter, herein complainant answered back by saying 
`Gago Ka’ to Mr. Andres; that the latter told the former that they 
should talk later at his (Mr. Andres) office but the complainant again 
called him (Mr. Andres) `Gago Ka’;


“7. That at this juncture, Mr. Andres deemed it proper to leave 
complainant; that while Mr. Andres was already in the Seam Weld Section 
of the company, complainant continued to stare at him without doing his 
job; that Mr. Andres decided to ask complainant what his problem was; 
that herein complainant retorted by saying: `BAKIT ANONG GUSTO MO, TANG 
INA MO’; Mr. Andres just left him (complainant);


“8. That at about 8:30 a.m. of the same day, while Mr. Andres was
 on his way to the canteen, herein complainant approached him (Mr. 
Andres) asking what he told the office regarding the incident between 
them; that Mr. Andres told the complainant to just ask the management 
about the matter; that complainant said `Panapanahon lang yan, panahon 
mo ngayon’;


“9. That at 3:08 p.m. of the same day, complainant approached Mr.
 Andres in the canteen and said `Patunayan mong minura kita at kung 
hindi, tandaan mo yan’.” 




On February 5, 1993, Engr. Chavez issued a memorandum
[3]

 to petitioner Escanlar requiring the latter to explain in writing 
within 48 hours from receipt thereof why no disciplinary action should 
be taken against him pursuant to the company’s Code of Discipline, for 
addressing Reynaldo T. Andres, his supervisor, in profane or obscene 
language and for threatening him.                        


On February 6, 1993, Reynaldo Andres wrote a memorandum
[4]

 to Engr. Chavez that petitioner Escanlar had again threatened him the 
previous day at the basketball court of the company premises.           
             


On February 8, 1993, petitioner Escanlar submitted a written explanation
[5]
 to Engr. Chavez. On the same day, Engr. Chavez through a memorandum
[6]

 informed petitioner Escanlar of the scheduled hearing of the January 29
 incident on February 17, 1993. The hearing was continued on March 12, 
1993.                        


After the administrative investigation, petitioner Escanlar was served a Notice of Termination
[7]

 dated April 19, 1993, for gross misconduct, i.e., uttering unsavory 
remarks and threatening his supervisor with physical harm.              
          


On April 21, 1993, petitioner filed a complaint for illegal 
dismissal against Autobus. After the submission by the parties of their 
respective position papers, the case was deemed submitted for 
resolution. On October 29, 1993, Labor Arbiter Melquiades Sol D. Del 
Rosario rendered a decision finding the dismissal of petitioner valid, 
pertinent portions of which are quoted hereunder: 




“Subjecting the evidence on record to a close scrutiny, this 
Arbitration Branch notes that the immediate cause of the row was the 
order of transfer given by the Supervisor, Mr. Andres to complainant and
 Julieto Anober from the Cutting Section to the Washer and Painting 
Sections, respectively. Complainant felt that being a machine operator 
and union president at that, his transfer to the washer section is 
without legal and justifiable basis and this constituted harassment. The
 records discloses, however, that the very Collective Bargaining 
Agreement, signed by the union headed by complainant and respondent 
provides for such transfer as management prerogative of respondent. 
Article VI of the C.B.A. (Annex ‘1,’ Respondent’s Rejoinder to Reply to 
Position Paper), reads:




‘The union hereby recognizes the company’s right x x x to 
transfer employees from one job to another; and to make changes in the 
duties of employees as the company may consider fit and proper to the 
conduct of its business and to exercise the inherent and customary 
prerogative and functions of management.’    




With this blanket grant of management prerogative, complainant 
who headed the union panel that concluded the C.B.A. with respondent 
company is now estopped to question his transfer of work. Further, the 
reason given for the transfer is the lack of manpower to the two (2) 
sections and there is no showing that the transfer is permanent. There 
is no evidence on record that showed complainant’s transfer as 
permanent. If at all it was done by respondent to meet the exigencies of
 the situation on account of a dearth in manpower. Finally, 
complainant’s transfer and subsequent dismissal can not be termed unfair
 labor practice on account of union busting because complainant failed 
to show by concrete proof that all the other officers of the union have 
been removed or are on the verge of being so. As it appears on records, 
the union has been in existence prior to complainant’s ascendancy as 
president of the union and even with complainant at the helm of the 
union as president, respondent company readily concluded a Collective 
Bargaining Agreement with the union. If union busting has been the 
agenda of respondent, complainant would not find himself all alone in 
his present predicament but his co-union officers likewise; but this is 
not the picture obtaining. 


In fine, this Arbitration Branch does not find any unfair labor 
practice committed by respondents as an aftermath of complainant’s 
dismissal. 


With regard to the issue of illegal dismissal, there is evidence 
on record that complainant violated Sec. 6 of Rule No. 28 of the Code of
 Discipline of respondent company, which provides: 




‘Seksiyon 6- ASAL AT KILOS – pag-insulto o panghihiya, pagbanta
 ng pananakit o pagpakita ng anumang sinasadyang di paggalang sa isang 
superbisor o sino mang opisyal ng kumpanya.’    




The transfer of complainant from the cutting section to the 
washer section has undoubtedly bruised complainant’s ego, and created a 
rancor in his heart not only because he has been assigned for quite 
sometime to operate a machine but also because he is the president of 
the worker’s union in the company. He had therefore a reason to commit 
the acts complained of by respondents. This Arbitration Branch therefore
 gives more weight and credence to the supervisor’s complaint that on 
four (4) occasions on January 29, 1993, complainant committed acts that 
violated said rule. These acts are: 


That at around 6:55 a.m. when complainant uttered against his 
supervisor ‘gago ka’ (twice) when the latter was accused with playing 
favorites in the choosing of employees for overtime work, when the 
supervisor pointed to one Tomas Marahit who can deny the charge of 
favoritism; that the complainant uttered the words ‘bakit, anong gusto 
mo, tang ina mo’ upon being approached by the supervisor to ask what the
 problem is because complainant was not doing his work but merely 
staring at him; that at 8:30 a.m., when the supervisor on his way to the
 canteen was threatened by complainant when he said, ‘panapanahon lang 
iyan, panahon mo ngayon’ when not told about the contents of the 
supervisor’s report to management concerning the incident that 
transpired between the two (2) of them; and that at 3:08 of the same 
day, again at the canteen when complainant approached his supervisor and
 uttered the following words: ‘Patunayan mong minura kita at kung hindi,
 tandaan mo iyan.’    


To these claims of the supervisor, complainant could only give a 
general denial. As between a positive averment and a mere denial the 
former should be accorded more weight and belief. Moreover, in 
complainant’s attempt to twist facts, he claims that it was the 
supervisor who uttered profane language but during the investigation of 
February 17, 1993, he admitted that he did not hear the supervisor 
uttered any bad word. Rather it was his co-worker Julieto Anober who 
told him about it not at the time the statement was uttered but in the 
afternoon when said co-worker was about to go home. This would 
constitute an after thought not worthy of credence. Furthermore, the 
contents of Julieto Anober’s affidavit did not mention during the 
investigation by the fact finding committee on March 12, 1993 said bad 
words but only the word ‘gago’ as having been uttered by the supervisor 
and relayed to complainant in the afternoon when he was about to go home
 (Annex ‘G-5,’ Respondent’s Rejoinder to Reply to Position Paper). He 
simply said, ‘iyan lang ang sinabi ko kay Ric’ (Complainant) nuong 
kinahapunan x x x pauwi na ako (Annex ‘G-6,’ Supra). 


The utterance of complainant are four-square with the violated 
rule aforecited. As there is legal cause and procedural due process 
accorded to complainant, this Arbitration Branch so holds and declares 
complainant’s dismissal to be valid.”
[8]
 




On appeal, the decision was affirmed by respondent National Labor Relations Commission in its Resolution
[9]
 dated July 12, 1994.                            


Dissatisfied with the NLRC decision, petitioner has come to this 
Court via this petition for certiorari and prohibition, contending that 
respondent NLRC acted with grave abuse of discretion in affirming the 
decision of the labor arbiter.                            


Petitioner asserts that there are questions of fact which have been
 overlooked and misconstrued by the labor arbiter and the NLRC.         
                   


It is well-settled in this jurisdiction that factual findings of 
the NLRC, particularly when they coincide with those of the Labor 
Arbiter, are accorded respect, even finality, and will not be disturbed 
for as long as such findings are supported by substantial evidence.
[10]

 In the instant case, we have no reason to deviate from this policy as 
petitioner failed to convince us that the findings of the labor arbiter 
as affirmed by the NLRC are devoid of basis or are otherwise capricious 
or arbitrary.
[11]
 


Petitioner was dismissed by respondent Autobus for violation of Section 6 (B) of the company’s Code of Discipline, to wit:




“B. SEKSIYON 6. ASAL AT KILOS 




24. Pag-insulto o panghihiya, pagbabanta ng pananakit o 
pagpapakita ng anumang sinasadyang di-paggalang sa isang superbisor o 
sino mang opisyal ng kumpanya.                                


Takdang Parusa: Suspensiyon hanggang sa pagtitiwalag, ayon sa bigat ng pagkakasala.”
[12]
 






which is considered as an act of gross misconduct and is a valid 
ground for terminating an employee pursuant to Article 282 of the Labor 
Code.                                


Misconduct is improper or wrong conduct. It is the transgression of
 some established and definite rule of action, a forbidden act, a 
dereliction of duty, willful in character, and implies wrongful intent 
and not mere error in judgment. The misconduct must be of such a grave 
and aggravated character and not merely trivial or unimportant.
[13]

 The charge of serious misconduct finds ample support in the record. 
Petitioner failed to satisfactorily rebut this accusation, his only 
defense being self-serving denials.                                


The repeated utterances by petitioner of obscene, insulting or 
offensive words against a superior were not only destructive of the 
morale of his co-employees and a violation of the company rules and 
regulations, but also constitute gross misconduct which is one of the 
grounds provided for by law to terminate the services of an employee.
[14]

 His attitude toward his supervisor, Reynaldo T. Andres, amounted to 
insubordination and conduct unbecoming of an employee which merited the 
penalty of dismissal.
[15]
 


Suffice it to state that an employee may be validly dismissed for 
violation of a reasonable company rule or regulation adopted for the 
conduct of the company’s business.
[16]

 It is the recognized prerogative of the employer to transfer and 
reassign employees according to the requirements of its business. For 
indeed, regulation of manpower by the company clearly falls within the 
ambit of management prerogative. A valid exercise of management 
prerogative is one which, among others, covers: work assignment, working
 methods, time, supervision of workers, transfer of employees, work 
supervision, and the discipline, dismissal and recall of workers. Except
 as provided for, or limited by special laws, an employer is free to 
regulate, according to his own discretion and judgment, all aspects of 
employment.
[17]
 


Then petitioner makes the farfetched claim that his dismissal is by
 reason of his being the union president, thus Autobus is allegedly 
guilty of unfair labor practice. This contention is devoid of any legal 
foundation. We agree with the observation of the respondent NLRC that: 




“x x x. The records are devoid of any substantial evidence that 
would establish the theory that the dismissal of herein complainant was 
entirely and exclusively motivated by the employees’ union activities or
 affiliations nor brought about by a clear discriminatory motive.”
[18]
 




Finally, petitioner assails the proceedings during the 
administrative investigation claiming violation of due process. We are 
not convinced.                                


The twin requirements of notice and hearing constitute the 
essential elements of due process. Due process of law simply means 
giving opportunity to be heard before judgment is rendered. In fact, 
there is no violation of due process even if no hearing was conducted, 
where the party was given a chance to explain his side of the 
controversy. What is frowned upon is the denial of the opportunity to be
 heard.
[19]
 


A perusal of the record reveals that petitioner was duly notified 
of the charges against him and given the opportunity to defend himself 
via a written explanation and thereafter, to adduce evidence on his 
behalf during a formal hearing where he was represented by a counsel of 
his own choice.                                  


A formal trial-type hearing is not even essential to due process. 
It is enough that the parties are given a fair and reasonable 
opportunity to explain their respective sides of the controversy and to 
present supporting evidence on which a fair decision can be based.
[20]
 This type of hearing is not even mandatory in cases of complaints lodged before the Labor Arbiter.
[21]
 


WHEREFORE
, the petition is DISMISSED. The 
resolution of respondent NLRC affirming the decision of the Labor 
Arbiter is AFFIRMED.                                    


SO ORDERED.                                      


Regalado, Melo, Puno,
 and 
Mendoza, JJ.
, concur. 




[1]
 Rollo, p. 38.  


[2]
 Annex “F” of Petition, NLRC Resolution, pp.4-5; Rollo, pp.44-45. 


[3]
 Rollo, p. 213. 


[4]
 Rollo, p. 14. 


[5]
 Rollo, p.16. 


[6]
 Rollo, p. 15. 


[7]
 Rollo, pp. 28-29. 


[8]
 Decision of Labor Arbiter; Annex “E” of Petition; Rollo, pp. 34-38. 


[9]
 Penned by 
Commissioner Alberto R. Quimpo, and concurred in by Presiding 
Commissioner Bartolome S. Carale and Commissioner Vicente S.E. Veloso, 
First Division. 


[10]
 Belaunzaran vs. 
NLRC, G.R. No. 120038, December 23, 1996, 265 SCRA 800, 806 citing PCI 
Automation Center, Inc. vs. NLRC, G.R. No. 115920, 29 January 1996; 
Zanotte Shoes, Inc. vs. LRC, 241 SCRA 261 (1995); Morales vs. NLRC, 241 
SCRA 103 (1995). 


[11]
 San Miguel Corporation vs. NLRC, G.R. No. 117055, March 29, 1996, 255 SCRA 580, 588. 


[12]
 Rollo, p. 28. 


[13]
 Dept. of Labor 
Manual, Sec. 4343.01, cited in C.A. Azucena, The Labor Code with 
Comments and Cases, Volume II, Revised Edition, 1996, p.662. 


[14]
 Asian Design and Manufacturing Corporation vs. Deputy Minister of Labor, 142 SCRA 79 (1986). 


[15]
 De la Cruz vs. NLRC, 177 SCRA 626 (1989). 


[16]
 Tanala vs. NLRC, 
G.R. No. 116588, January 24, 1996, 252 SCRA 314, 320, citing Soco vs. 
Mercantile Corporation of Davao, et. al., G.R. Nos. 53364-65, March 16, 
1987, 148 SCRA 526. 


[17]
 Manila Electric 
Company vs. NLRC, G.R. No. 114129, October 24, 1996, 263 SCRA 531, 538, 
citing San Miguel Brewery Sales Force Union vs. Ople, 170 SCRA 25 
(1989). 


[18]
 NLRC Resolution, Rollo, p. 48. 


[19]
 China City 
Restaurant Corporation vs. NLRC, 217 SCRA 443, 449 (1993), citing 
Philippine Airlines, Inc. vs. NLRC, 198 SCRA 748 (1991). 


[20]
 Abiera vs. NLRC, 215 SCRA 476, 481-482. 


[21]
 Ibid., p. 482, citing Llora Motors, Inc. vs. Drilon, 179 SCRA 175 (1989).






 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)