E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			353 Phil. 284
			




THIRD DIVISION


[ G.R. No. 112535, June 22, 1998 ]


CINDERELLA MARKETING CORPORATION, PETITIONER, VS. NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS COMMISSION, SECOND DIVISION, AND JLIO DAET, JOSELITO ARAMBULO, FELINA PAGTAUNAN, MARIETA DAET, EMMA AGUSTIN, GINA CRIACO, ROSEMARIE TONIO, ELLEN ILEDAN, EMANUEL LUMBERA, ELIZABETH DELIGOS, CORA VLLA, ALICE FIGURA, GRETHEL GARCIA, EVANGELIN CASAS AND LIGAYA HIDALGO, RESPONDENTS.

[G.R. NO. 113758. JUNE 22, 1998]

CINDERELLA MARKETING CORPORATION, PETITIONER, VS. NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS COMMISSION, SECOND DIVISION, AND AIDA ARNAIZ, MA. ANA ARAMBULO, MAGDALENA CASTILLO, ROWENA CONSTANTINO, JOJO MORILLO, IGNACIO RIMPOS, TERESA ROYECA, EVANGELINE SUMBILLA, LOLITA DE VEGA, FE MANGILIT, IRENE LUNA AND NESTOR GUTIERREZ, RESPONDENTS. 
D E C I S I O N




ROMERO, J.:


Petitioner is a corporation duly organized and existing under the
 laws of the Republic of the Philippines with its principal office at 
825 Epifanio de los Santos Avenue, Quezon City.
[1]
 Private respondents in G. R. Nos. 112535 and 113758 are employed by petitioner as “regular contractuals,”
[2]
 performing work as salesladies, wrappers, stockmen, pressers, as required by the regular business of petitioner.
[3]

 The two petitions are herein consolidated. They are seasonal employees 
who are hired by petitioner at the start of the peak season of the year,
 which normally runs from September until January. As soon as the demand
 for their services ends, their employment is terminated. The temporary 
hiring of additional employees within the five-month peak season was 
practiced by petitioner until the 1988 CBA negotiations, in which the 
Union proposed that the employees who are hired during the peak season 
be allowed to stay.
[4]
 Negotiations between petitioner and its employees resulted in the retention of seasonal employees as “regular contractuals,”
[5]

 who would enjoy all the benefits of regular employees, including 
security of tenure, minimum wage, overtime pay and all benefits provided
 for in the Code for a regular employee.
[6]

 Accordingly, as soon as a “regular contractual” is promoted or 
“regularized” to a position in a newly-opened branch of petitioner, said
 employee is automatically included in the bargaining unit represented 
by the union,
[7]
 and is entitled to the benefits of the CBA thereafter.
[8]

 Pursuant to this arrangement, until a regular contractual is 
“regularized,” he, although regarded as a regular employee, is excluded 
from the bargaining unit. Not satisfied with their exclusion from the 
bargaining unit, and the concomitant deprivation of the benefits granted
 to members thereof, petitioners continually demanded their inclusion in
 the bargaining unit, which was repeatedly denied. Hence, they filed a 
complaint with the National Labor Relations Commission (NLRC for 
brevity) praying, among others, that they be granted all benefits 
granted to regular employees in the Collective Bargaining Agreement 
(CBA) from the time they are regularized.

The parties filed their respective position papers,
[9]
 with the petitioner acknowledging that the complainants were already regular employees.
[10]

 The Labor Arbiter declared complainants as regular rank-and-file 
employees, with the additional right to membership in the bargaining 
unit defined under the CBA, ordering respondent to pay all benefits 
thereunder accorded to regular employees, with back benefits.
[11]
 On appeal to the National Labor Relations Commission (NLRC),
[12]
 the questioned decision was affirmed. In a Resolution dated December 14, 1993,
[13]

 the NLRC ruled that private respondents are regular employees of 
petitioner and, thus, are entitled to all the benefits granted under the
 CBA. Petitioner’s Motion for Reconsideration
[14]

 was denied in a subsequent Resolution dated February 7, 1994. Hence, 
this petition seeking to annul and set aside both Resolutions.

Petitioner corollarily contests the inclusion of private 
respondents as regular contractual employees within the scope of the 
bargaining unit, thus entitling them to benefits under the CBA. Although
 it admits that once private respondents become regular employees, they 
shall be entitled to the benefits provided under the CBA, it contends 
that they are not entitled to the “regularization differential” covering
 the period from the time they rendered one year of service until their 
promotion or regularization because they were still “seasonal 
employees.”

The issue which arises in this case is whether public respondent 
NLRC committed grave abuse of discretion in issuing said Resolutions.

We hold in the negative.

Petitioner has engaged in a semantic interplay of words in 
distorting the definition of a “regular employee” as provided by the 
Labor Code. Under Article 280 of the Labor Code:



“Regular and Casual Employment. -- The provisions of written 
agreement to the contrary notwithstanding and regardless of the oral 
agreement of the parties, an employment shall be deemed to be regular 
where the employee has been engaged to perform activities which are 
usually necessary or desirable in the usual business or trade of the 
employer, except where the employment has been fixed for a specific 
project or undertaking the completion or termination of which has been 
determined at the time of the engagement of the employee or where the 
work or services to be performed is seasonal in nature and the 
employment is for the duration of the season. 


“An employment shall be deemed to be casual if it is not covered by the preceding paragraph: Provided, That, 
any
 employee who has rendered at least one year of service, whether such 
service is continuous or broken, shall be considered a regular employee 
with respect to the activity in which he is employed and his employment 
shall continue while such activity exists
.”
  




It is undeniable that private respondents have rendered at least one 
year of service to petitioner as sales clerks, an activity which is 
usually necessary or desirable in the usual business or trade of the employer
.
 Therefore, they are regular employees under the CBA who are entitled to
 the benefits granted to all other regular employees of petitioner under
 the CBA. As held by public respondent:



"x x x (t)o be sure, 'an employee who has rendered at least one 
year of service, whether such service is continuous or broken, shall be 
considered a regular employee with respect to the activity in which he 
is employed, and his employment shall continue while such actually 
exists.' (Article 280, Labor Code, as amended). On the basis of this 
express mandate and as established by the evidence on record, the 
posture of the appellant that there is another classification of 
'regular contractuals' in the CBA cannot prevail over the provision of 
law as well pointed out by the appellees in their opposition to the 
appeal."
[15]






Petitioner further assails the jurisdiction of public respondent
[16]

 by alleging that the instant case involves "the interpretation or 
implementation of collective bargaining agreements," the resolution of 
which is within the exclusive jurisdiction of Voluntary Arbitration. It 
apparently relies on Article 217(c) of the Labor Code which states,



"Article 217(c). Cases arising from the interpretation or 
implementation of collective bargaining agreements and those arising 
form the interpretation or enforcement of company personnel policies 
shall be disposed of by the Labor Arbiter by referring the same to the 
grievance machinery 
and voluntary arbitration
 as may be provided in said agreements."
  




The aforestated provision of law is inapplicable to the case at bar 
which, as petitioner failed to consider, originated from a claim for 
benefits filed by private respondents and not an interpretation of a 
provision found in the collective bargaining agreement. Simply put, it 
does not involve the interpretation or implementation of the collective 
bargaining agreement as, in granting the relief sought by the parties, 
we are constrained to examine the basis of private respondents' claim 
and not the 
contents
 of the CBA.

Regarding the issue of jurisdiction, the applicable provision is Article 217(a)(6) of the Labor Code, to wit:



"Article 217. Jurisdiction of Labor Arbiters and the Commission. --
 (a) Except as otherwise provided under this Code, the Labor Arbiters 
shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and decide within
 thirty (30) calendar days after the submission of the case by the 
parties for decision without extension, even in the absence of 
stenographic notes, the following cases involving all workers, whether 
agricultural or non-agricultural: 


(1)      x x x
      

      (2)      x x x
      

      (3)      x x x 
      

      (4)      x x x
      

      (5)      x x x
      

      (6)      Except claims for Employees Compensation, Social Security, Medicare and maternity benefits, 
all other claims, arising from employer-employee relations
, including those of persons in domestic or household service, 
involving an amount exceeding five thousand pesos (P5,000.00) regardless of whether accompanied with a claim for reinstatement.
" (italics supplied) 




Clearly, the Labor Arbiter had jurisdiction over the instant case, 
since the claims of private respondents arose out of employer-employee 
relations and involve amounts exceeding five thousand pesos (P5,000.00).
 As public respondent correctly ruled,



"A close examination of the record x x x shows that in their basic 
complaint filed on March 27, 1992, the complainants sought full 
backwages and other benefits from the time they were dismissed to their 
actual reinstatement, back differentials in benefits as regular 
employees from the date they rendered one year service until their 
regularization, and moral damages. All these money claims, as expressly 
provided by law or appropriate agreement, are within the original and 
exclusive jurisdiction of Labor Arbiters pursuant to Article 217 of the 
Labor Code, as amended by B.P. Blg. 130 and B.P. Blg. 227. Jurisdiction 
is conferred by law, and once the Labor Arbiter acquires jurisdiction 
over the labor dispute, it continues to be exercised until the case has 
been finally decided on its merits as what transpired in the present 
proceeding."
[17]






As constantly reiterated in cases involving money claims of employees,
[18]

 where the claim of an employee of a corporation is over and above the 
amount of five thousand pesos (P5,000.00), the power to adjudicate such 
claim belongs to the Labor Arbiter, who has the exclusive jurisdiction 
over employees’ claims, where the amount of the claim exceeds five 
thousand pesos (P5,000.00).
[19]

 Here, the claim of each of the private respondents is well beyond the 
five thousand peso (P5,000.00) - requirement, thus placing the money 
claim of private respondents under the jurisdiction of the Labor 
Arbiter. A computation of the claims and differentials to which they are
 entitled is summarized as follows:







Julio B. Daet


P31,881.33
[20]






Emma R. Agustin 


P31,901.88
[21]






Joselito A. Arambulo 


P32,861.94
[22]






Evangeline B. Casas 


P32,409.13
[23]






Gina Ciriaco 


P31,972.48
[24]






Marieta R. Daet 


P32,220.14
[25]






Elizabeth L. Deligos 


P12,440.06
[26]






Alice C. Figura 


P32,764.58
[27]






Grethel F. Garcia 


P32,478.43
[28]






Ligaya A. Hidalgo 


P32,639.09
[29]






Ellen I. Iledan 


P31,850.27
[30]






Felina C. Pagtalunan 


P22,520.92
[31]






Rosemarie Tonio 


P23,226.99
[32]






Emmanuel C. Lumbera 


P21,735.06
[33]






Cora Villa 


P23,038.39
[34]








WHEREFORE
, considering the foregoing, neither of the
 questioned Resolutions assailed by petitioner may be struck down for 
having been issued with grave abuse of discretion. This petition is 
DISMISSED for lack of merit. No costs.


SO ORDERED
.

Narvasa C.J. (Chairman), Kapunan
, and 
Purisima, JJ.
, concur




[1]
 G.R. No. 112535, Rollo, p. 4.

[2]
 Ibid., p. 4b.

[3]
 Annex “D”.

[4]
 Ibid., p. 64 

[5]
 Respondent’s Position Paper, dated April 24, 1992, p. 2.

[6]
 Ibid. 

[7]
 CBA, Article II (4), Annex “P”.

[8]
 Petition, dated February 16, 1994, p. 6.

[9]
 Complainant’s 
Position Paper filed on March 5, 1992, Supplemental Position Paper filed
 on April 23, 1992; Respondent’s Position Paper filed on April 24, 1992.

[10]
 Ibid., p. 3.

[11]
 NLRC Decision penned by Labor Arbiter Arthur L. Amansec, dated Octobber 29, 1992.

[12]
 Dated December 15, 1992.

[13]
 The dispositive 
portion of which reads as follows: “There can be no dispute that the 
complainants are regular workers. They served as Sales Clerks whose 
duties and functions are usually necessary or desirable in the usual 
business of respondent corporation, which maintains stores engaged in 
the sale of dresses. On top of this, they have all rendered more than 
one (1) year of service (italics supplied) with the respondent 
corporation. As such, they are entitled to all the benefits extended 
under the CBA to all other regular employees. Of course, we are aware of
 the agreement in the CBA that regular contractual employees of which 
the complainants were at that time, will become entitled to the benefits
 provided in the CBA, only upon promotion or regularization, meaning, 
when assigned to a newly-opened store or to a vacated regular position. 
The respondents invoked the application of this agreement to disqualify 
the complainants from the regularization differential covering the 
period from their one year of service until their promotion or 
regularization. Such argument of respondents is without merit. The 
agreement cited is contrary to law (italics supplied), particularly 
Article 280 of the Labor Code, as amended, which emphasized the voiding 
of stipulations exempting from legal regularization. Besides, their 
disqualification from the enjoyment of the CBA-granted benefit would be 
discriminatory, because they are not any different from those who enjoy 
them. And, barring them from union participation violates their right to
 self-organization and equal work opportunities. x x x”

[14]
 Dated June 10, 1993.

[15]
 NLRC Resolution, dated December 14, 1993, pp. 6-7.

[16]
 Petition, p. 11.

[17]
 NLRC Resolution, dated December 14, 1993, p. 5.

[18]
 To wit, 
Brokenshire Memorial Hospital, Inc. v. Minister of Labor (1990), Aboitiz
 Shipping Corp. v. De la Serna (1990) and Servando’s Inc. v. Secretary 
of Labor (1990).

[19]
 Ibid.

[20]
 Annex “A”.

[21]
 Annex “A-1”.

[22]
 Annex “A-2”.

[23]
 Annex “A-3”.

[24]
 Annex “A-4”.

[25]
 Annex “A-5”.

[26]
 Annex “A-6”.

[27]
 Annex “A-7”.

[28]
 Annex “A-8”.

[29]
 Annex “A-9”.

[30]
 Annex “A-10”.

[31]
 Annex “A-11”.

[32]
 Annex “A-12”.

[33]
 Annex “A-13”.

[34]
 Annex “A-14”.






 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)