E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			353 Phil. 578
			




FIRST DIVISION


[ G.R. No. 125172, June 26, 1998 ]


SPOUSES ANTONIO AND LUZVIMINDA GUIANG, PETITIONERS, VS. COURT OF APPEALS AND GILDA CORPUZ, RESPONDENTS. 
D E C I S I O N




PANGANIBAN, J.:


The sale of a conjugal property requires the consent of both the 
husband and the wife. The absence of the consent of one renders the sale
 null and void, while the vitiation thereof makes it merely voidable. 
Only in the latter case can ratification cure the defect.

The Case


These were the principles that guided the Court in deciding this petition for review of the Decision
[1]
 dated January 30, 1996 and the Resolution
[2]

 dated May 28, 1996, promulgated by the Court of Appeals in CA-GR CV No.
 41758, affirming the Decision of the lower court and denying 
reconsideration, respectively.

On May 28, 1990, Private Respondent Gilda Corpuz filed an Amended Complaint
[3]

 against her husband Judie Corpuz and Petitioners-Spouses Antonio and 
Luzviminda Guiang. The said Complaint sought the declaration of a 
certain deed of sale, which involved the conjugal property of private 
respondent and her husband, null and void. The case was raffled to the 
Regional Trial Court of Koronadal, South Cotabato, Branch 25. In due 
course, the trial court rendered a Decision
[4]
 dated September 9, 1992, disposing as follows:
[5]




“ACCORDINGLY, judgment is rendered for the plaintiff and against the defendants, 


1.        Declaring both the Deed of Transfer of Rights dated March
 1, 1990 (Exh. ‘A’) and the ‘amicable settlement’ dated March 16, 1990 
(Exh. ‘B’) as null and void and of no effect; 


2.        Recognizing as lawful and valid the ownership and 
possession of plaintiff Gilda Corpuz over the remaining one-half portion
 of Lot 9, Block 8, (LRC) Psd-165409 which has been the subject of the 
Deed of Transfer of Rights (Exh. ‘A’); 


3.        Ordering plaintiff Gilda Corpuz to reimburse defendants 
Luzviminda and Antonio Guiang the amount of NINE THOUSAND (P9,000.00) 
PESOS corresponding to the payment made by defendants Guiangs to Manuel 
Callejo for the unpaid balance of the account of plaintiff in favor of 
Manuel Callejo, and another sum of P379.62 representing one-half of the 
amount of realty taxes paid by defendants Guiangs on Lot 9, Block 8, 
(LRC) Psd-165409, both with legal interests thereon computed from the 
finality of the decision.
  


No pronouncement as to costs in view of the factual circumstances of the case.”
  




Dissatisfied, petitioners-spouses filed an appeal with the Court of 
Appeals. Respondent Court, in its challenged Decision, ruled as follows:
[6]




“WHEREFORE, the appealed decision of the lower court in Civil Case 
No. 204 is hereby AFFIRMED by this Court. No costs considering 
plaintiff-appellee’s failure to file her brief, despite notice.”
  




Reconsideration was similarly denied by the same court in its assailed Resolution:
[7]




“Finding that the issues raised in defendants-appellants’ motion 
for reconsideration of Our decision in this case of January 30, 1996, to
 be a mere rehash of the same issues which We have already passed upon 
in the said decision, and there [being] no cogent reason to disturb the 
same, this Court RESOLVES to DENY the instant motion for reconsideration
 for lack of merit.”
  




The Facts


The facts of this case are simple. Over the objection of private 
respondent and while she was in Manila seeking employment, her husband 
sold to the petitioners-spouses one half of their conjugal property, 
consisting of their residence and the lot on which it stood. The 
circumstances of this sale are set forth in the Decision of Respondent 
Court, which quoted from the Decision of the trial court, as follows:
[8]




“1.      Plaintiff Gilda Corpuz and defendant Judie Corpuz are 
legally married spouses. They were married on December 24, 1968 in 
Bacolod City, before a judge. This is admitted by defendants-spouses 
Antonio and Luzviminda Guiang in their answer, and also admitted by 
defendant Judie Corpuz when he testified in court (tsn. p..3, June 9, 
1992), although the latter says that they were married in 1967. The 
couple have three children, namely: Junie – 18 years old, Harriet – 17 
years of age, and Jodie or Joji, the youngest, who was 15 years of age 
in August, 1990 when her mother testified in court. 


Sometime on February 14, 1983, the couple Gilda and Judie Corpuz, 
with plaintiff-wife Gilda Corpuz as vendee, bought a 421 sq. meter lot 
located in Barangay Gen. Paulino Santos (Bo. 1), Koronadal, South 
Cotabato, and particularly known as Lot 9, Block 8, (LRC) Psd-165409 
from Manuel Callejo who signed as vendor through a conditional deed of 
sale for a total consideration of P14,735.00. The consideration was 
payable in installment, with right of cancellation in favor of vendor 
should vendee fail to pay three successive installments (Exh. ‘2’, tsn. 
p. 6, February 14, 1990). 


2.        Sometime on April 22, 1988, the couple Gilda and Judie 
Corpuz sold one-half portion of their Lot No. 9, Block 8, (LRC) 
Psd-165409 to the defendants-spouses Antonio and Luzviminda Guiang. The 
latter have since then occupied the one-half portion [and] built their 
house thereon (tsn. p. 4, May 22, 1992). They are thus adjoining 
neighbors of the Corpuzes.
  


3.        Plaintiff Gilda Corpuz left for Manila sometime in June 
1989. She was trying to look for work abroad, in [the] Middle East. 
Unfortunately, she became a victim of an unscrupulous illegal recruiter.
 She was not able to go abroad. She stayed for sometime in Manila 
however, coming back to Koronadal, South Cotabato, x x x on March 11, 
1990. Plaintiff’s departure for Manila to look for work in the Middle 
East was with the consent of her husband Judie Corpuz (tsn. p. 16, 
Aug.12, 1990; p. 10, Sept. 6, 1991). 


After his wife’s departure for Manila, defendant Judie Corpuz 
seldom went home to the conjugal dwelling. He stayed most of the time at
 his place of work at Samahang Nayon Building, a hotel, restaurant, and a
 cooperative. Daughter Harriet Corpuz went to school at King’s College, 
Bo. 1, Koronadal, South Cotabato, but she was at the same time working 
as household help of, and staying at, the house of Mr. Panes. Her 
brother Junie was not working. Her younger sister Jodie (Joji) was going
 to school. Her mother sometimes sent them money (tsn. p. 14, Sept. 6, 
1991). 


Sometime in January 1990, Harriet Corpuz learned that her father 
intended to sell the remaining one-half portion including their house, 
of their homelot to defendants Guiangs. She wrote a letter to her mother
 informing her. She [Gilda Corpuz] replied that she was objecting to the
 sale. Harriet, however, did not inform her father about this; but 
instead gave the letter to Mrs. Luzviminda Guiang so that she [Guiang] 
would advise her father (tsn. pp. 16-17, Sept. 6, 1991).
  


4.        However, in the absence of his wife Gilda Corpuz, 
defendant Judie Corpuz pushed through the sale of the remaining one-half
 portion of Lot 9, Block 8, (LRC) Psd-165409. On March 1, 1990, he sold 
to defendant Luzviminda Guiang thru a document known as ‘Deed of 
Transfer of Rights’ (Exh. ‘A’) the remaining one-half portion of their 
lot and the house standing thereon for a total consideration of 
P30,000.00 of which P5,000.00 was to be paid in June , 1990. Transferor 
Judie Corpuz’s children Junie and Harriet signed the document as 
witnesses. 


Four (4) days after March 1, 1990 or on March 5, 1990, obviously to
 cure whatever defect in defendant Judie Corpuz’s title over the lot 
transferred, defendant Luzviminda Guiang as vendee executed another 
agreement over Lot 9, Block 8, (LRC) Psd-165408 (Exh. ‘3’), this time 
with Manuela Jimenez Callejo, a widow of the original registered owner 
from whom the couple Judie and Gilda Corpuz originally bought the lot 
(Exh. ‘2’), who signed as vendor for a consideration of P9,000.00. 
Defendant Judie Corpuz signed as a witness to the sale (Exh. ‘3-A’). The
 new sale (Exh. ‘3’) describes the lot sold as Lot 8, Block 9, (LRC) 
Psd-165408 but it is obvious from the mass of evidence that the correct 
lot is Lot 8, Block 9, (LRC) Psd-165409, the very lot earlier sold to 
the couple Gilda and Judie Corpuz. 


5.        Sometime on March 11, 1990, plaintiff returned home. She 
found her children staying with other households. Only Junie was staying
 in their house. Harriet and Joji were with Mr. Panes. Gilda gathered 
her children together and stayed at their house. Her husband was nowhere
 to be found. She was informed by her children that their father had a 
wife already.
  


6.        For staying in their house sold by her husband, plaintiff
 was complained against by defendant Luzviminda Guiang and her husband 
Antonio Guiang before the Barangay authorities of Barangay General 
Paulino Santos (Bo. 1), Koronadal, South Cotabato, for trespassing (tsn.
 p. 34, Aug. 17, 1990). The case was docketed by the barangay 
authorities as Barangay Case No. 38 for ‘trespassing’. On March 16, 
1990, the parties thereat signed a document known as ‘amicable 
settlement’. In full, the settlement provides for, to wit: 




‘That respondent, Mrs. Gilda Corpuz and her three children, 
namely: Junie, Hariet and Judie to leave voluntarily the house of Mr. 
and Mrs. Antonio Guiang, where they are presently boarding without any 
charge, on or before April 7, 1990. 


FAIL NOT UNDER THE PENALTY OF THE LAW.’
      




Believing that she had received the shorter end of the bargain, 
plaintiff went to the Barangay Captain of Barangay Paulino Santos to 
question her signature on the amicable settlement. She was referred 
however to the Officer-In-Charge at the time, a certain Mr. de la Cruz. 
The latter in turn told her that he could not do anything on the matter 
(tsn. p. 31, Aug. 17, 1990).
  


This particular point was not rebutted. The Barangay Captain who 
testified did not deny that Mrs. Gilda Corpuz approached him for the 
annulment of the settlement. He merely said he forgot whether Mrs. 
Corpuz had approached him (tsn. p. 13, Sept. 26, 1990). We thus conclude
 that Mrs. Corpuz really approached the Barangay Captain for the 
annulment of the settlement. Annulment not having been made, plaintiff 
stayed put in her house and lot.
  


7.        Defendant-spouses Guiang followed thru the amicable 
settlement with a motion for the execution of the amicable settlement, 
filing the same with the Municipal Trial Court of Koronadal, South 
Cotabato. The proceedings [are] still pending before the said court, 
with the filing of the instant suit.
  


8.        As a consequence of the sale, the spouses Guiang spent 
P600.00 for the preparation of the Deed of Transfer of Rights, Exh. ‘A’;
 P9,000.00 as the amount they paid to Mrs. Manuela Callejo, having 
assumed the remaining obligation of the Corpuzes to Mrs. Callejo (Exh. 
‘3’); P100.00 for the preparation of Exhibit ‘3’; a total of P759.62 
basic tax and special educational fund on the lot; P127.50 as the total 
documentary stamp tax on the various documents; P535.72 for the capital 
gains tax; P22.50 as transfer tax; a standard fee of P17.00; 
certification fee of P5.00. These expenses particularly the taxes and 
other expenses towards the transfer of the title to the spouses Guiangs 
were incurred for the whole Lot 9, Block 8, (LRC) Psd-165409.”
  




Ruling of Respondent Court


Respondent Court found no reversible error in the trial court’s 
ruling that any alienation or encumbrance by the husband of the conjugal
 property without the consent of his wife is null and void as provided 
under Article 124 of the Family Code. It also rejected petitioners’ 
contention that the “amicable settlement” ratified said sale, citing 
Article 1409 of the Code which expressly bars ratification of the 
contracts specified therein, particularly those “prohibited or declared 
void by law.”

Hence, this petition.
[9]


The Issues


In their Memorandum, petitioners assign to public respondent the following errors:
[10]




“I 


Whether or not the assailed Deed of Transfer of Rights was validly executed.
  


II
  


Whether or not the Court of Appeals erred in not declaring as 
voidable contract under Art. 1390 of the Civil Code the impugned Deed of
 Transfer of Rights which was validly ratified thru the execution of the
 ‘amicable settlement’ by the contending parties. 


III
  


Whether or not the Court of Appeals erred in not setting aside the 
findings of the Court a quo which recognized as lawful and valid the 
ownership and possession of private respondent over the remaining one 
half (1/2) portion of the subject property.”
  




In a nutshell, petitioners-spouses contend that (1) the contract of 
sale (Deed of Transfer of Rights) was merely voidable, and (2) such 
contract was ratified by private respondent when she entered into an 
amicable settlement with them.

This Court’s Ruling 


The petition is bereft of merit.

First Issue: 
Void or Voidable Contract?


Petitioners insist that the questioned Deed of Transfer of Rights
 was validly executed by the parties-litigants in good faith and for 
valuable consideration. The absence of private respondent’s consent 
merely rendered the Deed voidable under Article 1390 of the Civil Code, 
which provides:



“ART. 1390. The following contracts are voidable or annullable, 
even though there may have been no damage to the contracting parties: 


xxx                                                xxx                                        xxx
  


(2)      Those where the consent is vitiated by mistake, violence, intimidation, undue influence or fraud.
  


These contracts are binding, unless they are annulled by a proper action in court. They are susceptible of ratification.(n)”
  




The error in petitioners’ contention is evident. Article 1390, par. 2, refers to contracts visited by vices of consent, 
i.e.
,
 contracts which were entered into by a person whose consent was 
obtained and vitiated through mistake, violence, intimidation, undue 
influence or fraud. In this instance, private respondent’s consent to 
the contract of sale of their conjugal property was totally inexistent 
or absent. Gilda Corpuz, on direct examination, testified thus:
[11]




“Q    Now, on March 1, 1990, could you still recall where you were? 


A      I was still in Manila during that time.
  


xxx                                                xxx                                        xxx 
  


ATTY. FUENTES:
  


Q     When did you come back to Koronadal, South Cotabato?
  


A      That was on March 11, 1990, Ma’am. 


Q     Now, when you arrived at Koronadal, was there any problem 
which arose concerning the ownership of your residential house at 
Callejo Subdivision?
  


A      When I arrived here in Koronadal, there was a problem which 
arose regarding my residential house and lot because it was sold by my 
husband without my knowledge.”
  




This being the case, said contract properly falls within the ambit of
 Article 124 of the Family Code, which was correctly applied by the two 
lower courts:



“ART. 124. The administration and enjoyment of the conjugal 
partnership property shall belong to both spouses jointly. In case of 
disagreement, the husband’s decision shall prevail, subject to recourse 
to the court by the wife for proper remedy, which must be availed of 
within five years from the date of the contract implementing such 
decision. 


In the event that one spouse is incapacitated or otherwise unable 
to participate in the administration of the conjugal properties, the 
other spouse may assume sole powers of administration. These powers do 
not include the powers of disposition or encumbrance which must have the
 authority of the court or the written consent of the other spouse. 
In the absence of such authority or consent, the disposition or encumbrance shall be void
.
 However, the transaction shall be construed as a continuing offer on 
the part of the consenting spouse and the third person, and may be 
perfected as a binding contract upon the acceptance by the other spouse 
or authorization by the court before the offer is withdrawn by either or
 both offerors.(165a)” (Italics supplied) 




Comparing said law with its equivalent provision in the Civil Code, 
the trial court adroitly explained the amendatory effect of the above 
provision in this wise:
[12]




“The legal provision is clear. The disposition or encumbrance is 
void. It becomes still clearer if we compare the same with the 
equivalent provision of the Civil Code of the Philippines. Under Article
 166 of the Civil Code, the husband cannot generally alienate or 
encumber any real property of the conjugal partnership without the 
wife’s consent. The alienation or encumbrance if so made however is not 
null and void. It is merely voidable. The offended wife may bring an 
action to annul the said alienation or encumbrance. Thus, the provision 
of Article 173 of the Civil Code of the Philippines, to wit: 




‘Art. 173. The wife may, during the marriage and within ten years
 from the transaction questioned, ask the courts for the annulment of 
any contract of the husband entered into without her consent, when such 
consent is required, or any act or contract of the husband which tends 
to defraud her or impair her interest in the conjugal partnership 
property. Should the wife fail to exercise this right, she or her heirs 
after the dissolution of the marriage, may demand the value of property 
fraudulently alienated by the husband.(n)’
      




This particular provision giving the wife ten (10) years x x x 
during [the] marriage to annul the alienation or encumbrance was not 
carried over to the Family Code. It is thus clear that any alienation or
 encumbrance made after August 3, 1988 when the Family Code took effect 
by the husband of the conjugal partnership property without the consent 
of the wife is null and void.”
  




Furthermore, it must be noted that the fraud and the intimidation 
referred to by petitioners were perpetrated in the execution of the 
document embodying the amicable settlement. Gilda Corpuz alleged during 
trial that barangay authorities made her sign said document through 
misrepresentation and coercion.
[13]

 In any event, its execution does not alter the void character of the 
deed of sale between the husband and the petitioners-spouses, as will be
 discussed later. The fact remains that such contract was entered into 
without the wife’s consent. 

In sum, the nullity of the contract of sale is premised on the 
absence of private respondent’s consent. To constitute a valid contract,
 the Civil Code requires the concurrence of the following elements: (1) 
cause, (2) object, and (3) consent,
[14]
 the last element being indubitably absent in the case at bar.

Second Issue: 
Amicable Settlement


Insisting that the contract of sale was merely voidable, 
petitioners aver that it was duly ratified by the contending parties 
through the “amicable settlement” they executed on March 16, 1990 in 
Barangay Case No. 38.

The position is not well taken. The trial and the appellate 
courts have resolved this issue in favor of the private respondent. The 
trial court correctly held:
[15]




“By the specific provision of the law [Art. 1390, Civil Code] 
therefore, the Deed of Transfer of Rights (Exh. ‘A’) cannot be ratified,
 even by an ‘amicable settlement’. The participation by some barangay 
authorities in the ‘amicable settlement’ cannot otherwise validate an 
invalid act. Moreover, it cannot be denied that the ‘amicable 
settlement’ (Exh. ‘B’) entered into by plaintiff Gilda Corpuz and 
defendant spouses Guiang is a contract. It is a direct offshoot of the 
Deed of Transfer of Rights (Exh. ‘A’). By express provision of law, such
 a contract is also void. Thus, the legal provision, to wit: 




‘Art. 1422. A contract which is the direct result of a previous 
illegal contract, is also void and inexistent.’ (Civil Code of the 
Philippines). 




In summation therefore, both the Deed of Transfer of Rights (Exh. 
‘A’) and the ‘amicable settlement’ (Exh. ‘3’) are null and void.”
  




Doctrinally and clearly, a void contract cannot be ratified.
[16]


Neither can the “amicable settlement” be considered a continuing 
offer that was accepted and perfected by the parties, following the last
 sentence of Article 124. The order of the pertinent events is clear: 
after the sale, petitioners filed a complaint for trespassing against 
private respondent, after which the barangay authorities secured an 
“amicable settlement” and petitioners filed before the MTC a motion for 
its execution. The settlement, however, does not mention a continuing 
offer to sell the property or an acceptance of such a continuing offer. 
Its tenor was to the effect that private respondent would vacate the 
property. By no stretch of the imagination, can the Court interpret this
 document as the acceptance mentioned in Article 124.

WHEREFORE
, the Court hereby 
DENIES
 the petition and 
AFFIRMS
 the challenged Decision and Resolution. Costs against petitioners.

SO ORDERED
.

Davide, Jr., (Chairman), Bellosillo, Vitug
, and 
Quisumbing, JJ.
, concur.




[1]
 Penned by J. Lourdes K.
 Tayao-Jaguros and concurred in by JJ. Jorge S. Imperial, division 
chairman, and B.A. Adefuin-De la Cruz; rollo, pp. 47-57.

[2]
 Justice Oswaldo D. Agcaoili replaced Justice Imperial in the special former Ninth Division; rollo, p. 58.

[3]
 Docketed as Civil Case No. 284; rollo, pp. 22-27.

[4]
 Penned by Judge Francisco S. Ampig, Jr.

[5]
 RTC Decision, p. 12; rollo, p. 42.

[6]
 CA Decision, p. 10; rollo, p. 56.

[7]
 Rollo, p. 58.

[8]
 CA Decision, pp. 2-6; rollo, pp. 48-52.

[9]
 This case was submitted for decision upon receipt by the Court of private respondent’s Memorandum on November 17, 1997

[10]
 Rollo, pp. 91-92.

[11]
 TSN, August 17, 1990, pp. 16-17.

[12]
 Rollo, p. 37.

[13]
 TSN, August 17, 1990, pp. 13-14.

[14]
 Art. 1318, Civil Code.

[15]
 Rollo, p. 38.

[16]
 Art. 1409, Civil Code; and Tongoy vs. Court of Appeals, 123 SCRA 99, 119-121, June 28, 1983, per Makasiar, J.






 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)