E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			353 Phil. 623
			




EN BANC


[ G.R. No. 127255, June 26, 1998 ]


JOKER P. ARROYO, EDCEL C. LAGMAN, JOHN HENRY R. OSMEÑA, WIGBERTO E. TAÑADA, AND RONALDO B. ZAMORA, PETITIONERS, VS. JOSE DE VENECIA, RAUL DAZA, RODOLFO ALBANO, THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY, THE SECRETARY OF FINANCE, AND THE COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE, RESPONDENTS. 
R E S O L U T I O N




MENDOZA, J.:


Petitioners seek a rehearing and reconsideration of the Court’s 
decision dismissing their petition for certiorari and prohibition. 
Basically, their contention is that when the Majority Leader (Rep. 
Rodolfo Albano) moved for the approval of the conference committee 
report on the bill that became R.A. No. 8240, leading the Chair (Deputy 
Speaker Raul Daza) to ask if there was any objection to the motion, and 
Rep. Joker P. Arroyo asked, “What is that, Mr. Speaker?”, the Chair 
allegedly ignored him and instead declared the report approved. 
Petitioners claim that the question “What is that, Mr. Speaker?” was a 
privileged question or a point of order which, under the rules of the 
House, has precedence over other matters, with the exception of motions 
to adjourn.

The contention has no merit. Rep. Arroyo did not have the floor. 
Without first drawing the attention of the Chair, he simply stood up and
 started talking. As a result, the Chair did not hear him and proceeded 
to ask if there were objections to the Majority Leader’s motion. Hearing
 none, he declared the report approved. Rule XVI, §96 of the Rules of 
the House of Representatives provides:



§96. Manner of Addressing the Chair.- When a member desires to 
speak, he shall rise and respectfully address the Chair “Mr. Speaker.”
  




The Rules of the Senate are even more emphatic. Rule XXVI, §59 says:



§59. Whenever a Senator wishes to speak, he shall rise and request 
the President or the Presiding Officer to allow him to have the floor 
which consent shall be necessary before he may proceed. 


If various Senators wish to have the floor, the President or 
Presiding Officer shall recognize the one who first made the request.
  




Indeed, the transcript of the proceedings of November 21, 1996
[1]

 shows that after complaining that he was being “hurried” by the 
Majority Leader to finish his interpellation of the sponsor (Rep. 
Javier) of the conference committee report, Rep. Arroyo concluded and 
then sat down. However, when the Majority Leader moved for the approval 
of the conference committee report and the Chair asked if there was any 
objection to the motion, Rep. Arroyo stood up again and, without 
requesting to be recognized, asked, “What is that, Mr. Speaker?” 
Apparently, the Chair did not hear Rep. Arroyo since his attention was 
on the Majority Leader. Thus, he proceeded to ask if there was any 
objection and, hearing none, declared the report approved and brought 
down the gavel. At that point, Rep. Arroyo shouted, “No, no, no, wait a 
minute,” and asked what the question was. Only after he had been told 
that the Chair had called for objection to the motion for approval of 
the report did Rep. Arroyo register his objection. It is not, therefore,
 true that Rep. Arroyo was ignored. He was simply not heard because he 
had not first obtained recognition from the Chair.

Nor is it correct to say that the question (“What is that, Mr. 
Speaker?”) he was raising was a question of privilege or a point of 
order. Rule XX, §121 of the Rules of the House defines a question of 
privilege as follows —



SEC. 121. Definition. - Questions of privilege are those affecting 
the duties, conduct, rights, privileges, dignity, integrity or 
reputation of the House or of its members, collectively or individually.
  




while a point of order is defined as follows —



Points of order or questions of order are legislative devices used 
in requiring the House or any of its Members to observe its own rules 
and to follow regular or established parliamentary procedure. In effect,
 they are either objections to pending proceedings as violative of some 
of those rules or demands for immediate return to the aforementioned 
parliamentary procedure.
[2]






Petitioners further charge that there was a disregard of Rule XIX, 
§112 and Rule XVII, §103 of the Rules of the House which require that 
the Chair should state a motion and ask for the individual votes of the 
members instead of merely asking whether there was any objection to the 
motion. As explained already in the decision in this case, the practice 
in cases involving the approval of a conference committee report is for 
the Chair simply to ask if there are objections to the motion for 
approval of the report. This practice is well-established and is as much
 a part of parliamentary law as the formal rules of the House. As then 
Majority Leader Arturo M. Tolentino explained in 1957 when this practice
 was questioned:



MR. TOLENTINO. The fact that nobody objects means a unanimous 
action of the House. Insofar as the matter of procedure is concerned, 
this has been a precedent since I came here seven years ago, and it has 
been the procedure in this House that if somebody objects, then a debate
 follows and after the debate, then the voting comes in.
  


. . . . 
  


Mr. Speaker, a point of order was raised by the gentleman from 
Leyte, and I wonder what his attitude is now on his point of order. I 
should just like to state that I believe that we have had a substantial 
compliance with the Rules. The Rule invoked is not one that refers to 
statutory or constitutional requirement, and a substantial compliance, 
to my mind, is sufficient. When the Chair announces the vote by saying 
“Is there any objection?” and nobody objects, then the Chair announces 
“The bill is approved on second reading.” If there was any doubt as to 
the vote, any motion to divide would have been proper. So, if that 
motion is not presented, we assume that the House approves the measure. 
So I believe there is substantial compliance here, and if anybody wants a
 division of the House he can always ask for it, and the Chair can 
announce how many are in favor and how many are against.
[3]






At all events, Rep. Arroyo could have asked for a reconsideration of 
the ruling of the Chair declaring the conference committee report 
approved. It is not true he was prevented from doing so. The session was
 suspended, obviously to settle the matter amicably. From all 
appearances, the misunderstanding was patched up during the nearly 
hour-long suspension because, after the session was resumed, Rep. Arroyo
 did not say anything anymore. As the Journal of November 21, 1996 of 
the House shows, the session was thereafter adjourned.

On the same day, the bill was signed by the Speaker of the House 
and the President of the Senate, and certified by the respective 
secretaries of both houses of Congress as having been finally passed. 
The following day, the bill was signed into law by the President of the 
Philippines.

Finally, petitioners take exception to the following statement in
 the decision that “The question of quorum cannot be raised repeatedly —
 especially when the quorum is obviously present — for the purpose of 
delaying the business of the House.”
[4]

 They contend that, following this ruling, even if only 10 members of 
the House remain in the session hall because the others have gone home, 
the quorum may not be questioned.

That was not the situation in this case, however. As noted in the
 decision, at 11:48 a.m. on November 21, 1996, Rep. Arroyo questioned 
the existence of a quorum, but after a roll call, it was found that 
there was one. After that, he announced he would again question the 
quorum, apparently to delay the voting on the conference report. Hence, 
the statement in the decision that the question of quorum cannot 
repeatedly be raised for the purpose of delaying the business of the 
House.

In sum, there is no basis for the charge that the approval of the
 conference committee report on what later became R.A. No. 8240 was 
railroaded through the House of Representatives. Nor is there any need 
for petitioners to invoke the power of this Court under Art. VIII, §1 of
 the Constitution to determine whether, in enacting R.A. No. 8240, the 
House of Representatives acted with grave abuse of discretion, since 
that is what we have precisely done, although the result of our review 
may not be what petitioners want. It should be added that, even if 
petitioners’ allegations are true, the disregard of the rules in this 
case would not affect the validity of R.A. No. 8240, the rules allegedly
 violated being merely internal rules of procedure of the House rather 
than constitutional requirements for the enactment of laws. It is well 
settled that a legislative act will not be declared invalid for 
non-compliance with internal rules.

WHEREFORE
, the motion for rehearing and reconsideration is DENIED with FINALITY.

SO ORDERED.



Narvasa C.J., Regalado, Davide, Jr., Romero, Bellosillo, Melo, Puno, Kapunan, Martinez, Quisumbing
, and 
Purisima, JJ.
, concur.

Vitug, J.
, I reiterate my separate (concurring) opinion promulgated with the decision.

Panganiban, J.
, former counsel of a party.




[1]
 Transcript, pp. 128-129, Supplemental Comment on Petition, Annex 3. 

[2]
 INOCENCIO B. PAREJA, PARLIAMENTARY GUIDELINES: HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 33 (1969).

[3]
 4 CONG. REC., 413-414 (Feb. 15, 1957).

[4]
 Decision, pp. 18-19. 






 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)