E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			869 Phil. 554
			




EN BANC


[ A.M. No. 2019-18-SC, January 28, 2020 ]


(RE: ALLEGED DISHONESTY AND FALSIFICATION OF CIVIL SERVICE ELIGIBILITY OF MR. SAMUEL R. RUNEZ, JR., CASHIER III, CHECKS DISBURSEMENT DIVISION, FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT OFFICE - OFFICE OF THE COURT ADMINISTRATOR)


D E C I S I O N




PER CURIAM:



Antecedents






Samuel R. Runez, Jr. currently holds the position of Cashier III, Checks
 Disbursement Division, Financial Management Office, Office of the Court
 Administrator. He has worked with the Court in different capacities for
 almost thirty-five (35) years.



Acting on confidential reports that he did not actually pass the Civil 
Service Professional Examination, the Office of Administrative Services 
(OAS) discovered that his 201 file did not bear a Certificate of his 
Civil Service Professional Level Eligibility. What his 201 file 
contained was his Letter dated October 4, 1999 which he submitted to the
 Court's Selection and Promotion Board, claiming he had a Civil Service 
Professional Level Eligibility in support of his application for the 
position of Cashier II.
[1]
 His 201 file also contained several Personal Data Sheets
[2]

 which he submitted to the Court. In all these Personal Data Sheets, he 
declared that he obtained a rating of 80.51% in the May 16, 1999 Civil 
Service Professional Examination.



In response to the query of the OAS pertaining to the Civil Service 
Professional Level Eligibility of Runez, Jr., the Civil Service 
Commission (CSC), under Letter dated October 4, 2019, replied that based
 on its Master List of Passing/Failing Examinees in the May 16, 1999 
Civil Service Professional Examination Runez, Jr. failed. He obtained a 
rating of 36.51%. The OAS, thus, required Runez, Jr. to explain why no 
administrative action should be taken against him for falsification of 
official document and serious dishonesty.



In his Explanation Letter dated October 24, 2019, Runez, Jr. stated that
 he already had a Civil Service Professional Level Eligibility since May
 13,
1994. He obtained a passing mark of 80.51% in the May 16, 1999 Civil
Service 	Professional 	Examination. 	The 	Certificate 	of 	Civil 	
Service
Professional Level Eligibility dated May 31, 1999 that was mailed to him
indicated this rating. He attached photocopies of his Certificate of 
Civil Service Professional Level Eligibility to his Explanation Letter 
and signified his readiness to present its original copy, if needed. He 
maintained that he never had any reason to doubt the authenticity of his
 Certificate of Civil Service Professional Level Eligibility. In fact, 
when he got appointed as Cashier II on February 15, 2000 and 
subsequently promoted to Cashier III on June 12, 2003, his appointment 
papers showed "PINAGTIBAY" on its face above the signature of CSC 
Director Arturo S.J. Panaligan. If he were not
qualified, the CSC would not have approved his appointments.


The OAS sought another confirmation from the CSC, this time, enclosing 
photocopies of Runez, Jr.'s Certificate of Civil Service Professional 
Level Eligibility dated May 31, 1999, including its mail envelope.



By Letter dated November 12, 2019, the CSC clarified that, while Runez, 
Jr. had a Civil Service Proofreader (Sub-Professional) Eligibility as of
 May 13, 1994, he did not pass the May 16, 1999 Civil Service 
Professional Examination where he obtained a fail rating of 36.51%. The 
records on file with the Integrated Management Office of the CSC Central
 Office, as well as
the Regional Register of Eligibles of the CSC Examination Services 
Division, invariably yielded these results.



When afforded another opportunity to comment on the CSC Report, Runez, 
Jr. said he had nothing more to say, albeit he emphasized that during 
his entire employment with the Court, he consistently received a "very 
satisfactory rating." He further asked that the charges against him be 
dismissed.



OAS Memorandum dated January 24, 2020






In its Memorandum dated January 24, 2020, the OAS found Runez, Jr. 
guilty of falsification of official document and serious dishonesty. It 
recommended that he be dismissed from the service with forfeiture of all
 retirement benefits, except accrued leave credits, and with prejudice 
to re-employment with government.




Ruling







The Court adopts in full the findings and recommendation of the OAS
in its Memorandum dated January 24, 2020.



The CSC consistently confirmed that Runez, Jr. obtained a fail rating of
 36.51% in the May 16, 1999 Civil Service Professional Examination as 
shown by its Master List of Passing/Failing Examinees in the May 16, 
1999
Civil Service Professional Examination. More, Runez, Jr.'s name does not
 appear in its Regional Register of Eligibles. These official records 
bear the highest probative value. Every entry found therein is presumed 
genuine and accurate, unless proven otherwise.
[3]



There is no doubt, therefore, that Runez, Jr.'s Certificate of Civil 
Service Professional Level Eligibility dated May 31, 1999 is spurious. 
His act of using a falsified Certificate of Civil Service Professional 
Level Eligibility for the purpose of securing employment with the Court 
and later supporting his bid for promotion constitutes falsification of 
official document and serious dishonesty.



In the absence of a satisfactory explanation, a person who has in his or
 her possession or control a falsified document and who makes use of the
 same, is presumed to be the forger or the one who caused its forgery.
[4]



Here, Runez, Jr. is presumed to have falsified his Certificate of Civil 
Service Professional Level Eligibility dated May 31, 1999. Notably, 
Runez, Jr. did not adduce any single piece of evidence to rebut this 
presumption. He
is, thus, guilty of falsification of official document. 











On the charge of serious dishonesty, we reckon with the basic definition
 of dishonesty. It is the disposition to lie, cheat, deceive or defraud;
 untrustworthiness; lack of integrity; lack of honesty, probity or 
integrity in principle; lack of fairness and straightforwardness; 
disposition to defraud, deceive or betray.
[5]

 Although dishonesty covers a broad spectrum of conduct, CSC Resolution 
No. 06-0538 sets the criteria for determining the severity of dishonest 
acts.
[6]



According to Section 3 of CSC Resolution No. 06-0538, for dishonesty to 
be considered serious, any of the following circumstances must be 
present:







1.


The dishonest act caused serious damage and grave prejudice to the government;






2.


The respondent gravely abused his authority in order to commit the dishonest act;






3.


Where the respondent is an accountable 
officer, the dishonest act directly involves property; accountable forms
 or money for which he is directly accountable; and respondent shows 
intent to commit material gain, graft and corruption;






4.


The dishonest act exhibits moral depravity on the part of the respondent;






5.


The respondent employed fraud and/or 
falsification of official documents in the commission of the dishonest 
act related to his/her employment;






6.


The dishonest act was committed several times or on various occasions;






7.


The dishonest act involves a Civil 
Service examination irregularity or fake Civil Service eligibility such 
as, but not limited to, impersonation, cheating and use of crib sheets.






8


Other analogous circumstances. (Emphasis supplied)








Here, 5, 6, and 7 characterized Runez, Jr.'s act of dishonesty. He 
employed fraud and/or falsification in falsely declaring under oath that
 he was a Civil Service Professional Level Eligible. He committed this 
act of dishonesty on various occasions. Last, his act of dishonesty 
involved the use of a fake Certificate of Civil Service Professional 
Level Eligibility. He, therefore, becomes liable for serious dishonesty.






Section 50 of the Revised Rules on Administrative Cases in the Civil 
Service classifies both falsification of official document and serious 
dishonesty as grave offenses that warrant the penalty of dismissal from 
the service.




The Court has repeatedly held that the image of a court of justice is 
mirrored in the conduct, official or otherwise, of its personnel. In 
truth, all court personnel are mandated to adhere to the strictest 
standards of honesty,





integrity, morality, and decency. In order to preserve the good name and
 integrity of the courts of justice, they must exemplify the highest 
sense of honesty and integrity.
[7]



Undoubtedly, Runez, Jr. has no place in the Judiciary, where only those 
possessing integrity, honesty, competence, and independence of mind are 
summoned to answer the clarion's call of public office.
[8]

 As a court employee, it was expected of Runez, Jr. to set a good 
example for other court employees in the standards of propriety, 
honesty, and fairness. It was expected of him to practice a high degree 
of work ethic and to abide by the exacting principles of ethical conduct
 and decorum.
[9]
 Indubitably, 
Runez, Jr. failed to meet these standards, having placed his personal 
interest over the interest of the Court. Indeed, his infractions 
besmirched the public perception of the image of the Court and cast 
serious doubt as to the ability of the Court to effectively exercise its
 power of administrative supervision over its employees.
[10]


WHEREFORE
, Samuel R. Runez, Jr., Cashier III, Checks Disbursement
 Division, Financial Management Office, Office of the Court 
Administrator, is 
LIABLE
 for the administrative offenses of 
FALSIFICATION OF OFFICIAL DOCUMENT
 and 
SERIOUS DISHONESTY
. He is 
DISMISSED
 from the service. The Court 
ORDERS
 the 
FORFEITURE
 of all of his retirement benefits, except accrued leave credits. He is 
PERPETUALLY BANNED

 from re-employment in any branch or instrumentality of the government, 
including any government­ owned or controlled corporations.



Let a copy of this Decision be furnished to the Civil Service
Commission.


SO ORDERED.
 
Peralta, (C.J.), Perlas-Bernabe, Leonen, 
Caguioa, Gesmundo, J. Reyes, Jr., Carandang, Lazaro-Javier, Inting, 
Zalameda, Lopez, Delos Santos
 and 
Gaerlan, JJ.
, concur.


A. Reyes, Jr
., and 
Hernando, JJ
., on official leave.



[1]
 This position requires 
Civil Service Professional Level Eligibility. This requirement also 
applies to his current position that he was promoted to on June 12, 
2003.


[2]
 Dated December 9, 2002, April 7, 2005, and April 26, 2017, as they appear in his 201 file.


[3]
 
Civil Service Commission v. Cayobit
, 457 Phil. 452, 460-461 (2003).


[4]
 
Pacasum v. People
, 603 Phil. 612, 636-637 (2009).


[5]
 
Committee on Security and Safety, Court of Appeals v. Dianco, et al
., 760 Phil. 169, 188 (2015).


[6]
 
Id
.


[7]
 
Floria v. Sunga
, 420 Phil. 637, 650 (2001).


[8]
 
Re: Spurious Certificate of Eligibility of Tessie G. Quires, Regional Trial Court, Office of the Clerk of
Court, Quezon City,
 523 Phil. 21, 31 (2006).


[9]
 Supra note 7.


[10]
 Id.






 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)