E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			392 Phil. 130
			




EN BANC


[ A. M. No. P-99-1316, August 08, 2000 ]


KENNETH S. NEELAND, COMPLAINANT, VS. ILDEFONSO M. VILLANUEVA, CLERK OF COURT, REGIONAL TRIAL COURT, BACOLOD CITY, AND NELSON N. ABORDAJE, SHERIFF III, MUNICIPAL TRIAL COURT IN CITIES, BRANCH 4, BACOLOD CITY, RESPONDENTS.
R E S O L U T I O N




PER CURIAM:


This refers to a motion for reconsideration of the resolution of 
the Court promulgated on October 29, 1999, dismissing respondent 
Ildefonso M. Villanueva, clerk of court, Regional Trial Court, Bacolod 
City from the service and forfeiting all his leave credits and 
retirement benefits, if any, with prejudice to reinstatement or 
re-employment in any agency, branch or instrumentality of the 
government, including government-owned and controlled corporations.

On February 6, 1996, Sugarland Motor Sales placed the highest bid
 price in the amount of forty thousand (P40,000.00) pesos for a motor 
vehicle owned by Kenneth S. Neeland subject of an auction sale.  Sheriff
 Nelson N. Abordaje, who conducted the public auction sale, turned over 
the amount of twenty thousand (P20,000.00) pesos, representing payment 
of the mortgage obligation of Kenneth S. Neeland, to mortgagee Sugarland
 Motor Sales.  Clerk of Court Ildefonso M. Villanueva, as ex-officio 
Provincial Sheriff, issued a certificate of sale conveying the motor 
vehicle to Sugarland Motor Sales.  However, the balance of twenty 
thousand pesos remained unaccounted for and was not turned over to the 
mortgagor.  Consequently, an administrative complaint was lodged against
 Sheriff Abordaje and Clerk of Court Ildefonso M. Villanueva.  Not 
satisfied with the explanation given by both respondents concerning the 
proceeds of the sale, after due hearing, on October 29, 1999, the Court 
meted out the penalty of dismissal to both Sheriff Abordaje and Clerk of
 Court Villanueva for gross misconduct.

Hence, this motion for reconsideration filed by respondent Villanueva.
[1]


After a review of the records, we note that this is the first 
administrative complaint against respondent in his long years of service
 with the judiciary.  He has also introduced various innovations in 
court to increase the efficiency of the employees.

Nevertheless, we remain convinced that respondent was remiss in 
his duty in this particular case.  It cannot be overlooked that 
respondent failed to oversee the rightful turnover of the balance of the
 proceeds of auction sale to the corresponding party, and more, the 
payment of the sheriff’s commission to the court.  He merely signed the 
minutes of the sale without ensuring the accuracy of its contents and he
 signed the certificate of sale without checking the disposition of the 
balance of the proceeds and fees accruing to the court.  Respondent must
 be held accountable for failure to exercise proper supervision over his
 subordinate.
[2]


However, respondent's lack of previous derogatory record may be considered in his favor.  Hence, we reduce the penalty.

WHEREFORE
, the Court GRANTS the motion for 
reconsideration of respondent Ildefonso M. Villanueva, and SETS ASIDE 
the resolution only insofar as it dismisses him from office.  He is, 
however, held liable for neglect of duty and sentenced to pay a FINE in 
the amount of five thousand (P5,000.00) pesos, with warning that a 
repetition of the same or similar offense will be dealt with more 
severely.

SO ORDERED.



Davide, Jr., C.J., Melo, Puno, Vitug, Kapunan, Mendoza, 
Panganiban, Quisumbing, Purisima, Pardo, Buena, Gonzaga-Reyes, 
Ynares-Santiago,
 and 
De Leon, Jr., JJ.
, concur.

Bellosillo, J.
, on official leave.




[1]
 Dated November 23, 1999, Rollo, pp. 92-118.

[2]
 Fabiculana vs. Gadon, 239 SCRA 542 (1994).







 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)