E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			533 Phil. 22
			




EN BANC


[ A.M. NO. 05-3-04-SC, September 11, 2006 ]


RE: LETTER DATED FEBRUARY 21, 2005 OF ATTY. NOEL S. SORREDA. A.M. NO. 05-3-04-SC
R E S O L U T I O N




PER CURIAM


In an 
en banc
 Resolution dated July 22, 2005 in A.M. No. 05-3-304-SC, the Court adjudged Atty. Noel S. Sorreda guilty of  contempt of court and violation of the Code of Professional Responsibility for maliciously attacking the Court and its members for the manner they resolved several cases mentioned in his letter of February 21, 2005 to then Chief Justice Hilario G. Davide Jr.  For this infraction, the Court indefinitely suspended Atty. Sorreda as a member of the Bar and prohibited him from engaging in the practice of law unless the Court orders otherwise.
In a subsequent letter of February 4, 2006, Atty. Sorreda continued with his old obnoxious ways and, in a virtual repeat of what he said previously but with more venom this time, Atty. Sorreda embarked on another assault against the dignity of the Court, adding that he "has not the slightest intention" of  apologizing for his misdeeds "either now or in the future." Worse still, he even dared the Court to up the penalty of suspension to disbarment.
In the expectation that Atty. Sorreda would mend his ways if given another chance, the Court merely imposed a strong warning. Accompanying the warning, however, was the 
caveat
 that any further derogatory remark from him, be it embodied in a letter or pleading, shall warrant an even more severe sanction, of which there is none other than disbarment.
In his present MANIFESTATION AND MOTION under date of July 18, 2006, Atty. Sorreda has raised a step further the level of his obstinacy and defiance. In a clearly insulting tone reflecting a remorseless and boorish person, he states that he has from the start defied the suspension order meted him by the Court and has continued with his professional practice as a lawyer both in the lower courts and before this Tribunal.
The Court's patience has been stretched to the limit by Atty. Sorreda's arrogance and disrespect. At the minimum, members of the legal fraternity owe courts of justice respect. By taking the lawyer's oath, they become  guardians of the law and an indispensable instrument in the orderly and impartial administration of justice. Deliberately veering away from the path which a lawyer ought to follow as called for by his oath and his profession cannot be tolerated by this Court as the disciplining authority. So it must be here. Atty. Sorreda has proven himself to be incorrigible. By his demeanor, as demonstrated by his penchant for addressing malicious letters and pleadings to this Court, Atty. Sorreda is unworthy to continue as an officer of the court.
WHEREFORE
, Atty. Noel S. Sorreda is 
DISBARRED
  from the practice of law. Let his name be stricken off the Roll of Attorneys.
This resolution shall take effect immediately. Let copies thereof furnished the Bar Confidant, to be appended to Atty. Sorreda's personal record; the National Office and the Quezon City Chapter of the IBP; the Philippine Judges Association; and all the courts of the land for their information and guidance.
SO ORDERED.
Panganiban, C. J, Puno, Quisumbing, Ynares-Santiago, Sandoval-Gutierrez, Carpio, Austria-Martinez, Corona, Carpio Morales, Callejo, Sr., Azcuna, Tinga, Chico-Nazario, Garcia
 and 
Velasco. JJ.,




 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)