E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			663 Phil. 74
			




SECOND DIVISION


[ G.R. No. 186070, April 11, 2011 ]


CLIENTLOGIC PHILPPINES, INC. (NOW KNOWN AS SITEL), JOSEPH VELASQUEZ, IRENE ROA AND RODNEY SPIRES, PETITIONERS, VS. BENEDICT CASTRO, RESPONDENT.
DECISION




NACHURA, J.:


This is a Petition for Review on 
Certiorari
 under Rule 45 of the Rules of Court, assailing the September 1, 2008 Decision
[1]
 and the
          January 7, 2009 Resolution
[2]
 of the Court of Appeals (CA), affirming with modification the November 29, 2007 resolution
[3]

 of the
          National Labor Relations Commission (NLRC), which held that 
respondent Benedict Castro  was not illegally dismissed. The CA,
          however, awarded respondent’s money claims, viz.: 



WHEREFORE
, premises considered, the instant Petition is 
PARTLY GRANTED
. The Resolutions dated 29 November 2007 and 23 January 2008
  of the National Labor Relations Commission (Third Division) in 
NLRC CN. RAB-CAR-02-0091-07 LAC NO. 08-002207-07
 are 
AFFIRMED
 with
  
MODIFICATION
 in that the monetary awards of Executive Labor Arbiter Vito C. Bose in his Decision dated 29 June 2007, as computed in
  Annex “A” thereof, 
ONLY
 for holiday premiums of Php 16,913.35; service incentive leave pay of Php 8,456.65; overtime pay of Php
  578,753.10; and rest day pay of Php 26,384.80 which [petitioners] shall jointly and solidarily pay to petitioner, are hereby
  
REINSTATED
. No pronouncement as to costs.


 SO ORDERED.
[4]




The second assailed issuance of the CA denied petitioners’ motion for reconsideration.
  



The facts:


Respondent was employed by petitioner ClientLogic Philippines, Inc. 
(now known as shall hereafter be referred to as SITEL on February 14,
    2005 as a call center agent for its Bell South Account. After six 
(6) months, he was promoted to the “Mentor” position, and thereafter to
    the “Coach” position. A “Coach” is a team supervisor who is in 
charge of dealing with customer complaints which could not be resolved 
by
    call center agents. In June 2006, he was transferred to the Green 
Dot Account.


During respondent’s stint at the Dot Green Account, respondent 
noticed that some of the call center agents under his helm would
    often make excuses to leave their work stations. Their most common 
excuse was that they would visit the company’s medical clinic. To
    verify that they were not using the clinic as an alibi to cut their 
work hours, respondent sent an e-mail to the clinic’s personnel
    requesting for the details of the agents who sought medical 
consultation. His request was denied on the ground that medical records
    of employees are highly confidential and can only be disclosed in 
cases of health issues, and not to be used to build any
    disciplinary case against them.


On October 11, 2006, respondent received a notice requiring him to 
explain why he should not be penalized for: (1) violating Green Dot
    Company’s Policy and Procedure for Direct Deposit Bank Info Request 
when he accessed a customer’s online account and then gave the latter’s
    routing and reference numbers for direct deposit; and (2) gravely 
abusing his discretion when he requested for the medical records of his
    team members. Respondent did not deny the infractions imputed 
against him. He, however, justified his actuations by explaining that 
the
    customer begged him to access the account because she did not have a
 computer or an internet access and that he merely requested for a
    patient tracker, not medical records.


In November 2006, a poster showing SITEL’s organizational chart was 
posted on the company’s bulletin board, but respondent’s name
    and picture were conspicuously missing, and the name and photo of 
another employee appeared in the position which respondent was
    supposedly occupying.


On January 22, 2007, SITEL posted a notice of vacancy for 
respondent’s position, and on February 12, 2007, he received a Notice of
    Termination. These events prompted him to file a complaint for 
illegal dismissal; non-payment of overtime pay, rest day pay, holiday
    pay, service incentive leave pay; full backwages; damages; and 
attorney’s fees before the Labor Arbiter (LA) against herein
    petitioners SITEL and its officers, Joseph Velasquez, Irene Roa, and
 Rodney Spires.
[5]
 


In their position paper,
[6]

 petitioners averred that respondent was dismissed on account of valid 
and justifiable causes. He acted
    with serious misconduct which breached the trust and confidence 
reposed in him by the company. He was duly furnished with the twin
    notices required by the Labor Code and further, he is not entitled 
to overtime pay, rest day pay, night shift differential, holiday
    pay, and service incentive leave pay because he was a supervisor, 
hence, a member of the managerial staff.


In a decision dated June 29, 2007,
[7]

 the LA ruled in favor of respondent by declaring him illegally 
dismissed and ordering
      petitioners to pay his full backwages and, in lieu of 
reinstatement, his separation pay.  The LA further awarded respondents 
money
      claims upon finding that he was not occupying a managerial 
position. The decretal portion of the decision reads: 




WHEREFORE
, all premises duly considered,  [petitioners] are hereby found guilty of illegally dismissing [respondent]. As
  such, [petitioners] shall be jointly and solidarily liable to pay [respondent] his full backwages from the date of his
  dismissal to the finality of this decision, computed as of today at 
One Hundred Thirty Eight Thousand Seven Hundred Fifty
  Nine Pesos and 80/100 (P138,759.80)
 plus, Seven Hundred Sixty Three Thousand Two Hundred Forty Eight Pesos and 67/100
  (P763,248.67) representing his separation pay at one month pay for every year of service, holiday pay and service incentive
  leave pay for the three years prior to the filing of this case, overtime pay for six(6) hours daily, rest day pay and ten
  percent (10%) as attorney’s fees.


All other claims are hereby dismissed for lack of evidence.


The computation of the foregoing monetary claims is hereto attached and made an integral part hereof as Annex “A.”


SO ORDERED.
[8]




Aggrieved, petitioners appealed to the NLRC which, in its November 29, 2007 resolution,
[9]

 reversed and set aside the decision of the
  LA by dismissing the complaint for lack of merit on the ground that 
respondent’s employment was terminated for a just cause. The
  NLRC failed to discuss the money claims.


On September 1, 2008, the CA affirmed the NLRC’s finding that there was no illegal dismissal. Anent the money claims, the CA
  concurred with the LA’s ruling.
[10]


Petitioners and respondent respectively moved for partial 
reconsideration, but their motions were denied in the CA Resolution 
dated January
  7, 2009.
[11]
 From the said 
denial, only petitioners resorted to this Court through the petition at 
bar. Respondent’s failure to partially
  appeal the CA’s Decision finding him not illegally dismissed has now 
rendered the same final and executory; hence, the instant petition
  shall traverse only the issue on money claims.


Petitioners argue in the main
[12]
 that, as a team supervisor, respondent was a member of the managerial staff; hence, he is not
  entitled to overtime pay, rest day pay, holiday pay, and service incentive leave pay. 


We deny the petition.


The petition hinges on the question of whether the duties and 
responsibilities performed by respondent qualify him as a member of
    petitioners’ managerial staff. This is clearly a question of fact, 
the determination of which entails an evaluation of the evidence on
    record.


The alleged errors of the CA lengthily enumerated in the petition
[13]
 are essentially factual in nature and, therefore, outside the ambit of a
    petition for review on 
certiorari
 under Rule 45 of the Rules 
of Civil Procedure. The Court does not try facts since such statutory 
duty is
    devolved upon the labor. It is not for this Court to weigh and 
calibrate pieces of evidence otherwise adequately passed upon by the 
labor
    tribunals especially when affirmed by the appellate court.
[14]
 


Petitioners claim exception to the foregoing rule and assert that the
 factual findings of the LA and the NLRC were conflicting. This is not
    true. The labor tribunals’ decisions were at odds only with respect 
to the issue of illegal dismissal. Anent, the money claims issue, it
    cannot be said that their rulings were contradictory because the 
NLRC, disappointingly, did not make any finding thereon and it 
erroneously
    construed that the resolution of the money claims was intertwined 
with the determination of the legality of respondent’s dismissal.
    Nonetheless, the CA has already rectified such lapse when it made a 
definitive review of the LA’s factual findings on respondent’s money
    claims. Agreeing with the LA, the CA held: 




Article 82 of the Labor Code states that the provisions of the 
Labor Code on working conditions and rest periods shall not apply to
  managerial employees. Generally, managerial employees are not entitled
 to overtime pay for services rendered in excess of eight hours a
  day.


Article 212(m) of the Labor Code defines a managerial employee as 
“one who is vested with powers or prerogatives to lay down and execute
    management policies and/or to hire, transfer, suspend, lay-off, 
recall, discharge, assign or discipline employees, or to effectively
    recommend such managerial actions.”


In his Position Paper, [respondent] states that he worked from 8:00
 p.m. to 10:00 a.m. or 4 p.m. to 12:00 p.m. of the following day; he was
    also required to work during his restdays and during holidays but he
 was not paid; he was also not paid overtime pay, night shift
    differentials, and service incentive leave. He was employed as call 
center agent on 14 February 2005, then promoted as “Mentor” in August
    2005, and again promoted to “Coach” position in September 2005, 
which was the position he had when he was terminated. A “coach” is a 
team
    supervisor who is in charge of dealing with customer complaints 
which could not be dealt with by call center agents, and if a call 
center
    agent could not meet the needs of a customer, he passes the 
customer’s call to the “coach.” Clearly, [respondent] is not a 
managerial
    employee as defined by law. Thus, he is entitled to [his] money 
claims.


As correctly found by Executive Labor Arbiter Bose: “Employees are 
considered occupying managerial positions if they meet all of the 
following conditions, namely: 




“1)	Their primary duty consists of management of the establishment in which they are employed or of a department or subdivision
  thereof;


“2)	They customarily and regularly direct the work of two or more employees therein;


“3)	They have the authority to hire or fire other employees of lower rank; or their suggestions and recommendations as to the
      hiring and firing and as to the promotion or any other change of status of other employees are given particular weight. 



“They are considered as officers or members of a managerial staff if they perform the following duties and responsibilities:




“1)	The primary duty consists of the performance of work directly related to management  policies of their employer;


“2)
    Customarily and regularly exercise discretion and independent judgment;


“3)	(i) Regularly and directly assist a proprietor or a
    managerial employee whose primary duty consists of management of the
 establishment in which he is employed or subdivision thereof;
    or (ii) execute under general supervision work along specialized or 
technical lines requiring special training, experience, or
    knowledge; or (iii) execute, under general supervision, special 
assignment and tasks x x x. 



“[Respondent’s] duties do not fall under any of the categories 
enumerated above. His work is not directly related to management
policies. Even the circumstances shown by the instant case reveal that 
[respondent] does not regularly exercise discretion and
independent judgment.  [Petitioners] submitted a list of the 
responsibilities of ‘HR Manager/Supervisor’ and ‘Division
Manager/Department Manager/Supervisors’ but these do not pertain to 
[respondent] who does not have any of the said positions. He was
just a team Supervisor and not [an] HR or Department Supervisor.”
[15]




We find no reversible error in the above ruling. The test of 
“supervisory” or “managerial status” depends on whether a person 
possesses
  authority to act in the interest of his employer and whether such 
authority is not merely routinary or clerical in nature, but requires 
the
  use of independent judgment.
[16]
 The position held by respondent and its concomitant duties failed to hurdle this test.


 As a coach or team supervisor respondent’s main duty was to deal 
with customer complaints which could not be handled or solved by call
  center agents. If the members of his team could not meet the needs of a
 customer, they passed the customer’s call to respondent.


This job description does not indicate that respondent can exercise 
the powers and prerogatives to effectively recommend such managerial
  actions which require the customary use of independent judgment. There
 is no showing that he was actually conferred or actually exercising
  the following duties attributable to a “member of the managerial 
staff,” viz.: 




1) 	The primary duty consists of the performance of work directly related to management of policies of their employer;


 2)	Customarily and regularly exercise discretion and independent judgment;


3)	(i)	Regularly and directly assist a proprietor or a managerial 
employee whose primary duty consists of management of the
    establishment in which he is employed or subdivision thereof; or 
(ii) execute under general supervision work along specialized or 
technical
    lines requiring special training, experience, or knowledge; or (iii)
 execute, under general supervision, special assignment and tasks; and


4)	Who do not devote more than 20 percent of their hours worked in a
 work week to activities which are not directly and closely related
      to the performance of the work described in paragraphs (1), (2), 
and (3) above.
[17]




According to petitioners, respondent also performed the following 
duties, as shown in the company’s Statement of Policy of Discipline:


Know and understand in full the Policy on Discipline including their underlying reasons.


Implement strictly and consistently the Policy on Discipline.


Ensure that the said Policy on Discipline is communicated to and understood by all employees.


Monitor compliance by employees with the said Policy.


Advise HR Manager on the state of discipline in their respective departments; problems, if any, and recommend solution(s) and
corrective              action(s).


As correctly observed by the CA and the LA, these duties clearly 
pertained to “Division Managers/Department Managers/ Supervisors,” which
  respondent was not as he was merely a team supervisor. Petitioners 
themselves described respondent as “the superior of a call center agent;
  he heads and guides a specific number of agents, who form a team.”
[18]


From the foregoing, respondent is thus entitled to his claims for 
holiday pay, service incentive leave pay, overtime pay and rest day pay,
  pursuant to Book Three of the Labor Code, specifically Article 82,
[19]
 in relation to Articles 87,
[20]
 93,
[21]
 and 95
[22]
 thereof. 


WHEREFORE
, premises considered, the Petition is hereby 
DENIED
. The September 1, 2008 Decision and the January 7, 2009 Resolution of the
Court of Appeals are 
AFFIRMED
. 


SO ORDERED.
 


Carpio (Chairperson), Peralta, Abad
, and 
Mendoza, JJ.
, concur. 




[1]
 Rollo
, pp. 33-51.


 
[2]
 Id. at 64-65. 


[3] 
Id. at 83-90.


 
[4]
 Supra note 1, at 48.


 
[5]
 Respondent’s Position Paper as cited in pages 2-4 of the CA Decision; supra. note 1, at 34-35.


 
[6]
 Rollo
, pp. 128-161. 


[7]
 Id. at 69-81. 


[8]
 Id. at 79-80.


 
[9] 
Supra note 3. 


[10]
 Supra note 1.


 
[11]
 Supre note 2. 


[12]
 In their petition, petitioners ascribe the following errors to the CA:
 I. 	REINSTATING THE LABOR ARBITER’S RULING THAT -


 
 
(a) 
 
PRIVATE
 RESPONDENT BENEDICT CASTRO’S DUTIES WITH THE COMPANY AS SIMPLY 
CHARACTERIZED AS, LIMITED TO, CATCHING A CUSTOMER’S CALL/COMPLAINTS WHEN
 THE SAME COULD NOT BE ADDRESSED BY CALL CENTER AGENTS;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
PRIVATE
 RESPONDENT BENEDICT CASTRO’S DUTIES WITH THE COMPANY DO NOT MAKE HIM 
FALL UNDER THE CATEGORY OF A “MANAGERIAL” EMPLOYEE OR A “MEMBER OF THE 
MANAGERIAL STAFF”;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c)
 
 
PRIVATE
 RESPONDENT BENEDICT CASTRO IS “JUST A TEAM SUPERVISOR” IMPLYING THAT HE
 IS NOT A SUPERVISOR CONTEMPLATED BY LAW AS BEING EXEMPT FROM PAYMENT OF
 HOLIDAY PAY, OVERTIME PAY, REST DAY PAY AND SERVICE INCENTIVE LEAVE 
PAY;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(d)
 
 PRIVATE RESPONDENT BENEDICT CASTRO’S WORK WAS NOT DIRECTLY RELATED TO MANAGEMENT POLICIES;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(e) 
 
SINCE
 PRIVATE RESPONDENT BENEDICT CASTRO WAS PAID HIS 13TH MONTH PAY, THE 
SAME PRECLUDES HIM FROM BEING A “MEMBER OF THE MANAGERIAL STAFF”;
 
 
 II.	IN RELATION TO THE FOREGOING, REINSTATING THE LABOR 
ARBITER’S FINDING THAT PRIVATE RESPONDENT BENEDICT CASTRO IS ENTITLED TO
 HOLIDAY PAY, OVERTIME PAY, REST DAY PAY AND SERVICE INCENTIVE LEAVE PAY. 
III.	FAILING TO CONSIDER ADMITTED AND OTHERWISE UNDISPUTED 
FACTS ESSENTIAL AND RELEVANT IN THE DETERMINATION AS TO WHETHER OR NOT 
PRIVATE RESPONDENT IS ENTITLED TO HOLIDAY PAY, OVERTIME PAY, REST DAY 
PAY AND SERVICE INCENTIVE LEAVE PAY. (
Rollo
, pp. ________)



[13]
 Id.


 
[14]
 See
 
Diversified Security, Inc. v. Bautista
, G.R. No. 152234, April 15, 2010, 618 SCRA 28, 293, citing 
Reyes v. National Labor Relations Commission
, G.R. No. 160233, August 8, 2007, 529 SCRA 487, 494. 


[15]
 Supra note 1, at 45-48.


 
[16]
 Gonzales v. NLRC
, 407 Phil. 486, 500 (2001); citing 
Magos v. NLRC
, 360 Phil. 670, 676 (1998); see also 
A. D. Gothong Mtg.Corp. Employees Union-ALU v. Hon. Nieves Confessor
, 376 Phil. 168, 173-174 (1999), citing 
Franklin Baker Company of the Phils. v. Hon. Trajano
, 241 Phil. 432, 439 (1988).


 
[17]
 Implementing Rules of the Labor Code, Book III, Rule I, Sec. 2(c). 


[18]
 Rollo
, pp. 11-30. 


[19]
 Art. 82. Coverage. – 
The provisions of this title shall apply to employees in all establishment and undertakings whether for profit or not
,
 but not to government employees, managerial employees, field personnel,
 members of the family of the employer who are dependent on him for 
support, domestic helpers, persons in the personal service of another, 
and workers who are paid by results x x x. (Emphasis supplied.) 


[20]
 Art. 87. 
Overtime work
.
 - Work may be performed beyond eight (8) hours a day provided that the 
employee is paid for the overtime work, an additional compensation 
equivalent to his regular wage plus at least twenty-five (25%) per cent 
thereof. Work performed beyond eight hours on a holiday or rest day 
shall be paid an additional compensation equivalent to the rate of the 
first eight hours on a holiday or rest day plus at least thirty percent 
thereof.


 
[21]
 Art. 93.
 Compensation for rest day, Sunday or holiday work
.
 - (a) Where an employee is made or permitted to work on his scheduled 
rest day, he shall be paid an additional compensation of at least thirty
 percent (30%) of his regular wage. An employee shall be entitled to 
such additional compensation for work performed on Sunday only when it 
is his established rest day. 
              
(b) When the nature of the work of the employee is such that he has no 
regular workdays and no regular rest days can be scheduled, he shall be 
paid an additional compensation of at least thirty percent (30%) of his 
regular wage for work performed on Sundays and holidays.

              
(c) Work performed on any special holiday shall be paid an additional 
compensation of at least thirty percent (30%) of the regular wage of the
 employee. Where such holiday work falls on the employees scheduled rest
 day, he shall be entitled to an additional compensation of at least 
fifty percent (50%) of his regular wage. 
              
(d) Where the collective bargaining agreement or other applicable 
employment contract stipulates the payment of a higher premium pay than 
that prescribed under this Article, the employer shall pay such higher 
rate. 


[22]
 Art. 95. Right to 
Service Incentive Leave. – (a) Every employee who has rendered at least 
one year of service shall be entitled to a yearly service incentive 
leave of five days with pay. x x x.






 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)