E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			A.M. No. 99-10-05-0
			




EN BANC


[ A.M. No. 99-10-05-0, August 07, 2001 ]


PROCEDURE IN EXTRA-JUDICIAL FORECLOSURE OF MORTGAGE

(AS FURTHER AMENDED, AUGUST 7, 2001)






In line with the responsibility of
an Executive Judge under Administrative Order No. 6, dated June 30, 1975, for
the management of courts within his administrative area, included in which is
the task of supervising directly the work of the Clerk of Court, who is also
the 
Ex-Office
 Sheriff, and his staff, and the issuance of commissions to
notaries public and enforcement of their duties under the law, the following
procedures are hereby prescribed in extrajudicial foreclosure of mortgages:


1.
 
All applications for
extra-judicial foreclosure of mortgage whether under the direction of the
sheriff or a notary public, pursuant to Act 3135, as amended by Act 4118, and
Act 1508, as amended, shall be filed with the Executive Judge, through the
Clerk of court who is also the Ex-Officio Sheriff.


2.
 
Upon receipt of an
application for extra-judicial foreclosure of mortgage, it shall be the duty of
the Clerk of Court to:


a)
 
receive and docket said
application and to stamp thereon the corresponding file number, date and time
of filing;


b)
 
collect the filing fees
therefore pursuant to rule 141, Section 7(c), as amended by A.M. No. 00-2-01-SC,
and issue the corresponding official receipt;


c)
 
examine, in case of real
estate mortgage foreclosure, whether the applicant has complied with all the
requirements before the public auction is conducted under the direction of the sheriff
or a notary public, pursuant to Sec. 4 of Act 3135, as amended;


d)
 
sign and issue the
certificate of sale, subject to the approval of the Executive Judge, or in his
absence, the Vice-Executive Judge.  No
certificate of sale shall be issued in favor of the highest bidder until all
fees provided for in the aforementioned sections and in Rule 141, Section 9(1),
as amended by A.M. No. 00-2-01-SC, shall have been paid; 
Provided,
 that
in no case shall the amount payable under Rule 141, Section 9(1), as amended,
exceed P100,000.00;


e)
 
after the certificate of
sale has been issued to the highest bidder, keep the complete records, while
awaiting any redemption within a period of one (1) year from date of
registration of the certificate of sale with the Register of Deeds concerned,
after which, the records shall be archived.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, juridical persons whose
property is sold pursuant to an extra-judicial foreclosure, shall have the
right to redeem the property until, but not after, the registration of the
certificate of foreclosure sale which in no case shall be more than three (3)
months after foreclosure, whichever is earlier, as provided in Section 47 of
Republic Act No. 8791 (as amended, Res. Of August 7, 2001).


Where the application concerns the
extrajudicial foreclosure of mortgages of real estates and/or chattels in
different locations covering one indebtedness, only one filing fee
corresponding to such indebtedness shall be collected.  The collecting Clerk of Court shall, apart
from the official receipt of the fees, issue a certificate of payment
indicating the amount of indebtedness, the filing fees collected, the mortgages
sought to be foreclosed, the real estates and/or chattels mortgaged and their
respective locations, which certificate shall serve the purpose of having the
application docketed with the Clerks of Court of the places where the other
properties are located and of allowing the extrajudicial foreclosures to
proceed thereat.


3.
 
The notices of auction
sale in extrajudicial foreclosure for publication by the sheriff or by a notary
public shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation pursuant to
Section 1, Presidential Decree No. 1079, dated January 2, 1977, and
non-compliance therewith shall constitute a violation of Section 6 thereof.


4.
 
The Executive Judge
shall, with the assistance of the Clerk of Court, raffle applications for
extrajudicial foreclosure of mortgage under the direction of the sheriff among
all sheriffs, including those assigned to the Office of the Clerk of Court and
Sheriffs IV assigned in the branches.


5.
 
The name/s of the
bidder/s shall be reported by the sheriff or the notary public who conducted
the sale to the Clerk of Court before the issuance of the certificate of sale.


This Resolution amends or modifies
accordingly Administrative Order No. 3 issued by then Chief Justice Enrique M.
Fernando on 19 October 1984 and Administrative Circular No. 3-98 issued by the
Chief Justice Andres R. Narvasa on 5 February 1998.


The Court Administrator may issue
the necessary guidelines for the effective enforcement of this Resolution.


The Clerk of Court shall cause the
publication of this Resolution in a nuewspaper of general circulation not later
than August 14, 2001 and furnish copies thereof to the Integrated Bar of the
Philippines.


This Resolution shall take effect
on the 1
st
 day of September of the year 2001.


Promulgated this 7
th
 day of
August 2001 in the City of Manila.


Davide, Jr., C.J., Bellosillo,
Melo, Puno, Vitug, Kapunan, Mendoza, Panganiban, Quisumbing, Pardo, Buena,
Gonzaga-Reyes, Ynares-Santiago, 
and 
De Leon, Jr., JJ.,

concur.


Sandoval-Gutierrez J., 
on leave.






 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)