E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			872 Phil. 1152
			




EN BANC


[ B.M. No. 3490, April 29, 2020 ]


REGIONALIZATION OF THE NEXT BAR EXAMINATIONS




Sirs/Mesdames:


Please take notice that the Court En Banc issued a Resolution dated April 29, 2020, which reads as follows:


 "B.M. No. 3490 (
Regionalization of the Next Bar Examinations
) 




Promulgated: April 29, 2020




 
R E S O L U T I O N


WHEREAS
, pursuant to its constitutional 
authority to promulgate rules concerning the admission to the practice 
of law, the Supreme Court promulgated Rule 138, Section 11
[1]
 of the Rules of Court, which provides that the Bar Examinations shall be held in Manila; 
  
WHEREAS
, Bar Matter No. 1142
[2]

 dated August 13, 2002, which states that the Integrated Bar of the 
Philippines-Cebu City Chapter had proposed Cebu City to be another site 
of the Bar Examinations, manifests early on existing clamor to have a 
regional site for the examinations;   
  
WHEREAS
, in Bar Matter No. 1142-A
[3]

 dated March 24, 2009, there was another request, this time by the 
National President of the Association of Law Schools in the Philippines,
 for the Bar Examinations in Manila to be simultaneously conducted in 
other sites in the Visayas and Mindanao;   
  
WHEREAS
, in Bar Matter No. 2310
[4]

 dated January 11, 2011, the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Talisay City and 
the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Mandaue City both requested that this 
Court hold the Bar Examinations for Visayas and Mindanao examinees in 
Cebu City;   
  
WHEREAS
, in 2016, this Court had previously 
agreed to a proposal by retired Court of Appeals Justice Portia 
Hormachuelos to simultaneously hold the Bar Examinations in Manila and 
Cebu City if the regional site had 1,000 Bar candidates,
[5]
 but later disallowed it merely because less than a thousand expressed such interest;
[6]


WHEREAS
, retired Court of Appeals Justice 
Portia Hormachuelos attributed the low turnout to the inadequate time to
 survey all prospective examinees, as well as the distance among the 
provinces that hampered the delivery of survey results;
[7]


WHEREAS
, the Philippine Association of Law 
Schools, through its current leadership, convened meetings with law 
school deans to discuss the possibility of having a regional site for 
the next Bar Examinations;   
  
WHEREAS
, the proposal to have a regional site 
for the next Bar Examinations was received favorably by the law school 
deans who have expressed their full support;   
  
WHEREAS
, based on a February 21, 2020
[8]
 survey conducted by the Philippine Association of Law Schools, 89% of the respondents
[9]

 were in favor of a regional site for the next Bar Examinations, 
preferably in Cebu City, with positive comments on the proposal even 
from respondents in Metro Manila and Luzon schools;   
  
WHEREAS
, the social impact of providing a 
regional site for the Bar Examinations cannot be overemphasized, and may
 even lead to more regional sites in future examinations;   
  
WHEREAS
, the holding of the Bar Examinations 
in Manila has been a continuous financial and emotional burden on Bar 
candidates from the Visayas and Mindanao, who must spend inordinate sums
 to sustain their stay in Manila and be separated from their loved ones 
who could provide them with tangible and emotional support;   
  
WHEREAS
, this Court must be responsive to the 
pleas and needs of the Bar candidates from the provinces in order to 
reduce inequities;   
  
WHEREAS
, providing a regional site for the Bar
 Examinations would address these inequities by allowing Bar candidates 
from the Visayas and Mindanao to cut their expenses, continue with their
 employment, and receive the much-needed support from their family and 
friends while they review and take the examinations;  
  
 
WHEREAS
, recent governmental restrictions in 
light of the COVID-19 pandemic has limited movement between provinces, 
making regionalization more crucial than ever;   
  
WHEREAS
, a regional testing site for the next 
Bar Examinations will lessen the logistical problems caused by travel 
restrictions and curfew regulations that the Bar candidates will face in
 the coming months;   
  
WHEREAS
, a corresponding increase in the Bar application fees is necessary to cover the additional costs of regionalization;  
  
 
NOW, THEREFORE
, acting on the recommendations of Associate Justice Marvic M.V.F. Leonen, this Court, sitting
 En Banc
, resolves to 
APPROVE
 the following:  
  
 (a) Cebu City shall be designated as a regional site for the 
next Bar Examinations. A site visit shall be conducted to find a 
suitable venue for the examinations, the schedule of which shall be 
determined once domestic travel restrictions have been lifted;  
  
 (b) The Bar Examinations in Manila shall be held at the 
University of Santo Tomas in Manila. The final venue for the regional 
Bar Examinations in Cebu City shall be announced at a later date;  
  
 (c) Law graduates from the Visayas and Mindanao shall be given
 the option to take the next Bar Examinations in Manila or Cebu City. 
The guidelines for applications of those who wish to take the 
examinations in Cebu City will be announced later through a Bar 
bulletin;  
  
 (d) The Bar application fees shall correspondingly be 
increased to cover the costs of a regional examination site in Cebu 
City. The Office of the Bar Confidant is directed to submit a budget 
proposal taking into account social distancing measures and safety 
precautions in view of the COVID-19 pandemic.   
  
Rule 	138,  Section 	11 of the 	Rules 	of 	Court 	is 
AMENDED
 accordingly."   
  
Peralta (C.J.), Perlas-Bernabe, Leonen, Caguioa, A. Reyes, 
Jr., Gesmundo, J. Reyes, Jr., Hernando, Carandang, Lazaro-Javier, 
Inting, Zalameda, Lopez, Delos Santos
, and
 Gaerlan, JJ
., concur.


[1]
 RULES OF COURT, Rule 138, sec. 11 provides: 
  


SECTION 11. Annual Examination. — Examinations for admission to 
the bar of the Philippines shall take place annually in the City of 
Manila. They shall be held in four days to be designated by the chairman
 of the committee on bar examiners. The subjects shall be distributed as 
follows: First day: Political and International Law (morning) and Labor 
and Social Legislation (afternoon); Second day: Civil Law (morning) and 
Taxation (afternoon); Third day: Mercantile Law (morning) and Criminal 
Law (afternoon); Fourth day: Remedial Law (morning) and Legal Ethics and
 Practical Exercises (afternoon). 




 
[2]
 Re: Resolution No. 04, series of 2002, of the Cebu City Chapter of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines (IBP).
  
 
[3]
 Re: Resolution No. 04, Series of 2002, of the Cebu City Chapter of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines [IBP].   
  
[4]
 In Re: 4
th

 SP Resolution No. 2010-84 of the City of Talisay, Cebu; Resolution No. 
12-603-2010 of the Sangguniang Panlungsod, City of Mandaue, Cebu.
  
 
[5]
 Gerome M. 
Dalipe, 
Law school deans, IBP execs back efforts to hold Bar exams in 
Cebu
, SUNSTAR PHILIPPINES, February 24, 2016, available at 
www.sunstar.com.ph/article/60061
> (last visited on May 26, 
2020).
  
 
[6]
 Michael Vyncenth
 H. Braga, Law dean still hopeful for Bar's regionalization, THE 
FREEMAN, May 31, 2016, available at 
www.philstar.com/the-freeman/cebu-news/2016/05/31/1588649/law-dean-­still-hopeful-bars-regionalization> ( last visited on May 26, 2020).  
  
 
[7]
 Id.  
  
 
[8]
 Report on the Survey Responses from Deans of Law Schools Members of the Philippine Law Schools dated February 21, 2020.  
  
 
[9]
 Id. at 1-2. The 
report also states: [P]lease note that out of a total of 127 possible 
responses, 28 Deans submitted survey responses. No analyses or 
conclusions however are made herein as to whether or not any 
significance on the acceptability of the proposed Bar Reforms can be 
attached to the fact that only around 22% of the law schools provided 
responses to the survey.
 




 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)